.ig
*******************************************************************************
$Source: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/share/man/man7/rs-232.7,v $
$Revision: 1.1 $  $State: Exp $  $Locker:  $

$Author: polk $  $Date: 1994/01/05 00:26:03 $

RS-232.7 -- RS-232 man page

Copyright (c) 1993 by Stephen G. Diercouff, tfm associates, ltd.

Revision History

Version 1.0 -- /* sgd@tfm.com: Fri Mar 19 22:52:24 PST 1993 */
               Initial Revision

*******************************************************************************
..
.Dd March 18, 1993
.Os BSD 4.4
.Dt RS-232 7
.Sh NAME
.Nm RS-232
.Nd RS-232 signal names and connector configurations
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The signal names:
.sp
.ie n
\{
.Bd -literal  -offset left


---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DB-25   DB-9                              Source
 Pin     Pin   Name    EIA     CCITT    DTE   DCE             Signal
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1       -      PG      AA     101      -     -         Frame Ground
  2       3      TD      BA     103      ->              Transmit Data
  3       2      RD      BB     104            <-        Receive Data
  4       7      RTS     CA     105      ->             Request To Send
  5       8      CTS     CB     106            <-        Clear To Send
  6       6      DSR     CC     107            <-       Data Set Ready
  7       5      SG      AB     102      -     -         Signal Ground
  8       1      DCD     DF     109            <-     Data Carrier Detect
  9       -      POS     -       -             <-  Pos. DC Test Voltage *
 10       -      NEG     -       -             <-  Neg. DC Test Voltage *
 11       -      -       -       -       -     -          Unassigned
 12       -      SDCD    SCF    122            <-  Sec. Data Carrier Detect
 13       -      SCTS    SCB    121            <-   Secondary Clear To Send
 14       -      STD     SBA    118      ->         Secondary Transmit Data
 15       -      TC      DB     114            <-       Transmit Clock
 16       -      SRD     SBB    119            <-   Secondary Receive Data
 17       -      RC      DD     115            <-        Receive Clock
 18       -      LL      LL     141      ->    -        Local Loopback
 19       -      SRTS    SCA    120      ->          Sec. Request To Send
 20       4      DTR     CD     108.2    ->           Data Terminal Ready
 21       -      SQ      CG     110            <-  Signal Quality Detect **
 22       9      RI      CE     125            <-       Ring Indicator
 23       -       -      CH CI  111 112  ->    <-     Data Rate Selector
 24       -      SCTE    DA     113      ->         External Clock Transmit
 25       -      TM      TM     142            <-        Test Mode ***
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\}
.el
\{
.ne 28
.TS
allbox,center,tab(@);
c c c c c c s c
c c ^ ^ ^ c c ^
n n c c c c c c .
DB-25@DB-9@Name@EIA@CCITT@Source@Signal
Pin@Pin@@@@DTE@DCE@
_
1@\(en@PG@AA@101@\(en@\(en@Frame Ground
2@3@TD@BA@103@\(->@@Transmit Data
3@2@RD@BB@104@@\(<-@Receive Data
4@7@RTS@CA@105@\(->@@Request To Send
5@8@CTS@CB@106@@\(<-@Clear To Send
6@6@DSR@CC@107@@\(<-@Data Set Ready
7@5@SG@AB@102@\(en@\(en@Signal Ground
8@1@DCD@DF@109@@\(<-@Data Carrier Detect
9@\(en@POS@\(en@\(en@@\(<-@Positive DC Test Voltage \(dg
10@\(en@NEG@\(en@\(en@@\(<-@Negative DC Test Voltage \(dg
11@\(en@\(en@\(en@\(en@\(en@\(en@Unassigned
12@\(en@SDCD@SCF@122@@\(<-@Secondary Data Carrier Detect
13@\(en@SCTS@SCB@121@@\(<-@Secondary Clear To Send
14@\(en@STD@SBA@118@\(->@@Secondary Transmit Data
15@\(en@TC@DB@114@@\(<-@Transmit Clock
16@\(en@SRD@SBB@119@@\(<-@Secondary Receive Data
17@\(en@RC@DD@115@@\(<-@Receive Clock
18@\(en@LL@LL@141@\(->@\(en@Local Loopback
19@\(en@SRTS@SCA@120@\(->@@Secondary Request To Send
20@4@DTR@CD@108.2@\(->@@Data Terminal Ready
21@\(en@SQ@CG@110@@\(<-@Signal Quality Detect \(dd
22@9@RI@CE@125@@\(<-@Ring Indicator
23@\(en@DRS@CH CI@111 112@\(->@\(<-@Data Rate Selector
24@\(en@SCTE@DA@113@\(->@@Serial Clock Transmit External
25@\(en@TM@TM@142@@\(<-@Test Mode \(sc
_
.TE
\}
.sp
.ie t
\{
.Bl -tag -width 7p
.It \(dg
\(en These signals are officially Reserved, but usually used for
test voltages.
.It \(dd
\(en This signal may be used as a remote loopback signal in RS-232-D,
if it is not being used as SQ.
.It \(sc
\(en This signal was Unassigned in RS-232-C, but commonly used
as BUSY indicator.
.El
\}
.el
\{
.Bl -tag -width "*** "
.It *
\(en These signals are officially Reserved, but usually used for
test voltages.
.It **
\(en This signal may be used as a local loopback signal in RS-232-D,
if it is not being used as SQ.
.It ***
\(en This signal was Unassigned in RS-232-C, but commonly used
as BUSY indicator.
.El
\}
.Sh EXPLANATION OF SIGNAL USAGE
A brief explanation of common signal usage by
.Ux
systems, referenced by RS-232-D Signal Name, follows.
Note that all signals are discussed from the DTE point of view.
.Ss PRIMARY SIGNALS
.Bl -tag -width "SDCD "
.It \fBPG\fP
\fBProtective Ground\fP (Often referred to as \fBFrame Ground\fP) \(en should be
connected to the equipment frame, and is where the shield should be connected
if shielded cable is being used to reduce RFI noise. This signal should only
be connected at the DTE end.
.It \fBSG\fP
\fBSignal Ground\fP \(en provides d.c. reference potential for all signals, including
data, timing, and control operations. Required for all connections.
.It \fBTD\fP
\fBTransmit Data\fP \(en data signals originating by the DTE, including
signals to be transmitted via a data channel for receiving stations,
data to be passed to the DCE for testing and maintenance purposes, and
signals for programming or control of DCE equipment.
.It \fBRD\fP
\fBReceive Data\fP \(en data signals from the DCE,
including responses to data channel
signals, test signals, and programming or control signals from the DTE equipment.
.It \fBRTS\fP
\fBRequest To Send\fP \(en Defined by RS-232-D as a control signal used to
prepare the DCE for transmission of data. Commonly used by
.Ux
systems as \fBReady To Receive\fP, \fIi.e.\fP,
the DTE is ready to receive data from the DCE when \fBRTS\fP is in the on state.
.It \fBCTS\fP
\fBClear to Send\fP \(en the DCE is ready to receive data or control
transmissions from the DTE.
.It \fBDCD\fP 
\fBReceived Line Signal Detector\fP \(en commonly called \fBData Carrier
Detect\fP. Signal from the DCE indicating its data channel signal is within
appropriate limits, \fIe.g.\fP when DCE is a modem, carrier signal is
present and modem is ready to communicate with other modem.
.It \fBDTR\fP
\fBData Terminal Ready\fP \(en signal from DTE to place DCE in on-line or
off-line state.
.It \fBDSR\fP
\fBData Set Ready\fP \(en the DCE signals the DTE that it is powered up,
connected, and ready to receive signals from the DTE (\fIi.e.\fP is not
currently conducting a data transmission, test, or dial operation).
Often used in conjunction with the \fBDTR\fP signal.
.It \fBRI\fP
\fBRing Indicator\fP \(en signal used by an auto-answer modem to inform the
DTE that a ring signal is present on the telephone line. Most modern modems
indicate call-progress on the \fPTD\fP line, and \fBRI\fP is no longer used
by most RS-232 circuits.
.El
.Ss SYNCHRONOUS COMMUNICATION SIGNALS
.Bl -tag -width "SDCD "
.It \fBSTD\fP
\fBSecondary Transmit Data\fP \(en Equivalent to \fBTD\fP, except it is used
to transmit data over the backward channel in synchronous circuits.
.It \fBSRD\fP
\fBSecondary Receive Data\fP \(en Equivalent to \fBRD\fP, except it is used
to receive data over the backward channel in synchronous circuits.
.It \fBSRTS\fP
\fBSecondary Request To Send\fP \(en Equivalent to \fBRTS\fP, except it is used
to control the backward channel transmit function in synchronous circuits.
.It \fBSCTS\fP
\fBSecondary Clear To Send\fP \(en Equivalent to \fBCTS\fP, except it is used
to control whether the DCE is conditioned to transmit data on the backward
channel in synchronous circuits.
.It \fBSDCD\fP
\fBSecondary Received Line Signal Detector\fP \(en Equivalent to \fBDCD\fP,
except it is used to indicate whether the backward channel is in appropriate
limits in synchronous circuits.
.It \fBTC\fP
\fBTransmit Clock\fP \(en timing signal from the DTE that should be ON and OFF
for approximately equal periods of time. The DTE should provide a data signal
on \fBTR\fP while the \fBTC\fP signal is ON.
.It \fBRC\fP
\fBReceive Clock\fP \(en timing signal from the DCE that should be ON and OFF
for approximately equal periods of time. A transition from ON to OFF should
coincide with the center of each data segment of the \fBRD\fP circuit.
.It \fBSCTE\fP
\fBSerial Clock Transmit External\fP \(en provides DCE with signal timing
information. This signal should be ON and OFF for approximately equal periods
of time, and the transition from ON to OFF condition should coincide with the
center of each data segment of the \fBTD\fP circuit.
.It \fBDRS\fP
\fBData Rate Selector\fP \(en signal used by both the DTE and DCE to select
one of the two data signalling rates of a dual rate synchronous DCE.
.El
.Ss TEST SIGNALS
.Bl -tag -width "SDCD "
.It \fBPOS\fP
\fBPositive DC Test Voltage\fP \(en an unofficial use of pin 9 in a DB-25
RS-232 circuit, used to provide positive test voltage from the DCE.
.It \fBNEG\fP
\fBNegative DC Test Voltage\fP \(en an unofficial use of pin 10 in a DB-25
RS-232 circuit, used to provide negative test voltage from the DCE.
.It \fBLL\fP
\fBLocal Loopback\fP \(en new in RS-232-D, initiates a local
loopback test condition in the DCE.
.It \fBSQ\fP
\fBSignal Quality Detect\fP \(en indicates whether there is a probability of
error in the data received in the data channel. Used prior to RS-232-D.
If this signal is not being used for \fBSQ\fP, RS-232-D defines its use as
\fBRemote Loopback\fP.
.It \fBTM\fP
\fBTest Mode\fP \(en new in RS-232-D. Signal indicates if a maintenance
condition exists in the DCE. Prior to RS-232-D, this signal was undefined, 
but commonly used as a BUSY indicator by the DCE.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
EIA Standard EIA-232-D
.br
CCITT Fascicle VIII.1\(enV.24
.Sh AUTHOR
Stephen Diercouff  (sgd@tfm.com)
