.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/cinfo.4f,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:09 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH CINFO 4F "July 12, 1993"
.SH NAME
cinfo \- remote facsimile machine control parameters database
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B cinfo
subdirectory in the
.I FlexFAX
spooling area holds parameters to use when sending to
remote facsimile machines.
Each remote machine that has control parameters has a file in the
.B cinfo
directory named by the remote machine's fully-qualified
phone number.
Parameter files have a simple
.SM ASCII
format.
Each line is of the form
.sp .5
.ti +0.5i
\fBtag\fP: \fIvalue\fP
.br
.sp .5
where a \fItag\fP identifies a capability and a \fIvalue\fP
is either a string, number, or boolean value.
.PP
The following parameters are recognized:
.in +0.5i
.sp .5
.ta \w'supports2DEncoding    'u +\w'boolean    'u
.nf
\fBTag	Type	Description\fP
rejectNotice	string	if set, reject outgoing jobs and return notice string
tracingLevel	number	if set, set SessionTracing to this value
.fi
.in -0.5i
.PP
The facsimile server,
.IR faxd (1M),
uses the information stored in this directory when
sending facsimile.
.PP
The
.I rejectNotice
item can be used to force jobs for the remote machine
to be rejected before dialing the telephone.
If this item has a non-empty string value, then all submitted
facsimile are returned to the sender with a rejection notice
that includes the specified string.
This mechanism can be useful for dealing with problematic fax machines.
.PP
The
.I tracingLevel
item can be used to override the 
.B SessionTracing
configuration parameter for calls to a specific facsimile machine;
see
.IR config (4F)
for information on this control.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR faxd (1M),
.IR config (4F),
.IR info (4F)
