.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/faxalter.1,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:10 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH FAXALTER 1 "January 15, 1993"
.SH NAME
faxalter \- alter parameters of a facsimile job queued for transmission
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faxalter
[
.B \-h
.I hostname
] [
.B \-a
.I tts
] [
.B \-k
.I killtime
] [
.B \-n
.I notify
] [
.B \-p
] [
.B \-t
.I maxtries
] [
.B \-DQR
]
.IR jobid ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Faxalter
alters parameters of one or more facsimile jobs that
are queued for transmission.
At present only two parameters can be altered;
the time to send a job and the notification scheme.
A 
.I jobid
is the number printed by
.IR sendfax (1)
when a job is queued for transmission.
This number can also be obtained from
.IR faxstat (1).
.PP
The
.B \-a
option is used to specify a new time to send a job.
The syntax for specifying a time is the same as used
by
.IR sendfax (1)
(and
.IR at (1)).
The
.B \-p
option specifies that the jobs should be
.IR pushed ;
that is, they should be sent immediately
(NB: this is equivalent to ``\-a now''.)
.PP
The
.B \-k
option is used to specify a new time to kill a job;
the syntax is the same as used for the 
.B \-a
option.
.PP
The
.B \-t
option is used to alter the maximum number of times the
server should call the remote fax machine.
.PP
The
.B \-n
option is used to select a notification scheme to
use for the specified jobs.
Possible schemes are:
``\fInone\fP'' for no notification (default),
``\fIwhen done\fP'' for notification when the job is completed,
``\fIwhen requeued\fP'' for notification when the job is requeued
after a failed transmission attempt.
The
.BR \-Q ,
.BR \-D ,
and
.B \-R
options are shorthand for these notification schemes,
respectively.
One can also leave off ``\fIwhen\fP'' when using the
.B \-n
option; e.g., ``\fIdone\fP'' instead of ``\fIwhen done\fP''.
.PP
Users can only alter jobs that they
have queued; except the
.I fax
user who can alter any job.
.PP
By default,
.I faxalter
contacts the facsimile server on the host specified
in the
.B FAXSERVER
environment variable.
This can be overridden with the
.B \-h
option.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.B "Job %s not altered: it was not queued."
The specified job was not found in the server's queue.
.PP
.B "Job %s not altered: open failed; check SYSLOG."
The server was unable to do some necessary operation on the 
remote host and so could not alter the job.
More information about what went wrong can be found in the
.IR syslogd (1M)
log file on the server's machine.
.PP
.B "Job %s not altered: could not establish server process owner."
A request was made by the ``fax'' user to alter
a job that it did submit.
This request was not accepted because
the server was unable to deduce the identity under which
it was executing.  That is, there was no password file
entry for the server's effective user id.
This (usually) indicates that the entry in the file
.I ${USRETC}/inetd.conf
on the remove machine is setup wrong; see
.IR faxd.recv (1M)
for more information.
.PP
.B "Job %s not altered: you neither own it nor are the fax user."
A request was made to alter a job that the user does not own
(and the user is not the ``fax'' user).
.SH BUGS
.I Faxalter
must be run on the same host on which the job was
submitted.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR flexfax (1),
.IR sendfax (1),
.IR faxrm (1),
.IR faxstat (1),
.IR faxd.recv (1M)
