.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/faxanswer.1m,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:10 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH FAXANSWER 1M "May 12, 1993"
.SH NAME
faxanswer \- tell facsimile server to answer the telephone
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faxanswer
[
.B \-q
.I queue-dir
] [
.B \-h
.I how
] [
.I modem
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Faxanswer
sends a message to the facsimile server process servicing
.I modem
telling it to answer the telephone.
This is useful, for example, when a modem is used on a
shared phone line and configured to not normally answer the phone.
.PP
If
.I modem
is specified, it can either be the name (typically the
last component of the terminal port the
modem is attached to), or the full name
of the associated 
.SM FIFO
named pipe file, e.g. ``\s-1FIFO\s+1.ttym2''.
If no modem is specified,
.I faxanswer
will send the request to the ``\s-1FIFO\s+1'' named pipe file;
this is convenient for machines that have only one facsimile
server running.
.SH OPTIONS
The
.B \-q
option can be used to specify a spooling area other than
.IR ${SPOOL} .
.PP
The
.B \-h
option can be used to specify exactly ``how'' the phone should
be answered.
By default, the facsimile server is told to answer the phone and
accept any kind of connect (voice, data, fax).
Discrimination of the type of call is dependent on a modem's
.I "adaptive-answer"
support.
The
.B \-h
option can be used to force the server to answer the
phone for particular type of call: one of
.IR fax ,
.IR data ,
or
.IR voice .
.SH FILES
Consult
.IR intro (4F)
for a complete discussion of the structure and
content of the spooling area.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR intro (4F),
.IR faxd (1M)
