.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/faxcover.1,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:10 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH FAXCOVER 1 "June 25, 1993"
.SH NAME
faxcover \- generate a cover page for an outgoing facsimile
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faxcover
[
.B \-t
.I to-name
] [
.B \-l
.I to-location
] [
.B \-x
.I to-company
] [
.B \-v
.I to-voice-number
] [
.B \-c
.I comments
] [
.B \-r
.I regarding
] [
.B \-p
.I page-count
] [
.B \-s
.I pagesize-name
] [
.B \-C
.I template-file
]
.B \-f
.IR from-name
.B \-n
.I fax-number
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Faxcover
generates a PostScript\(tm cover page document on the standard output.
The cover page fills the entire area of a default page and
is created according to the information supplied
on the command line and a 
.I "cover sheet template"
file.
.PP
.I Faxcover
is normally invoked by the
.IR sendfax (1)
program to generate the cover page for each outgoing facsmile.
.PP
.I Faxcover
works by creating a PostScript dictionary
that contains definitions for the variable information
that is to be placed on the facsimile cover page.
Specifically, a dictionary with the following
symbols are defined:
.sp .5
.nf
.in +.1i
.ta \w'\fIto-voice-number    'u +\w'destination geographic location    'u +\w'from-voice-number    'u
\fBSymbol	Description	Symbol	Description\fP
\fIto\fP	destination person	\fIfrom\fP	\fIsending\fP person
\fIto-company\fP	destination company	\fIfrom-company\fP	sender's company
\fIto-location\fP	destination geographic location	\fIfrom-location\fP	sender geographic location
\fIto-voice-number\fP	person's voice phone number	\fIfrom-voice-number\fP	sender's voice phone number
\fIto-fax-number\fP	destination fax phone number	\fIfrom-fax-number\fP	sender's fax phone number
\fIregarding\fP	Re: subject	\fIcommentsX\fP	\fI\s-1X\s+1\fP'th line of comments
\fIpage-count\fP	# pages other than cover page	\fItodays-date\fP	current date and time
\fIpageWidth\fP	page width in millimeters	\fIpageLength\fP	page length in millimeters
.in -.1i
.fi
.PP
If the comments string is longer than 35 characters, it
is broken, on word boundaries, into multiple PostScript strings.
Each line is defined as 
.I comments\s-1X\s+1
where
.I \s-1X\s+1
is the line number; e.g.
.I comments2
for the second line of comments.
.PP
If information is unavailable for an item, the associated
symbol is defined to be a null string.
.PP
Following the definition prologue,
a cover sheet template file is copied.
This file is expected to be a PostScript program
that uses the supplied definitions to generate a
cover page.
The template must include a
.B showpage
operator to cause the page to be imaged.
The above definitions will be defined in the
.IR "current dictionary" .
A trailing
.B end
operator is supplied by
.IR faxcover ,
so any manipulation of the dictionary stack should
leave the current dictionary on the top of the
stack on completion.
.PP
The default template file is named
.IR faxcover.ps ;
this can be overridden with the
.B -C
option by specifying a file in the
.B FAXCOVER
environment variable.
If the file name is not an absolute path, then
.I faxcover
looks first for this file in the home directory
of the sender.
If no such file is present, then it looks in the
library directory where the
.I FlexFAX
client application data are installed.
If no template file is located,
.I faxcover
will terminate without generating a cover page.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Complaints about not being able to locate a template file.
.SH FILES
.ta \w'${LIBDATA}/faxcover.ps    'u
~/.faxdb	personal fax number database
.br
${LIBDATA}/faxcover.ps	default cover page template
.br
${LIBDATA}/pagesizes	page size database
.SH BUGS
Information not supplied on the command line is
currently obtained from the
.I ~/.faxdb
file.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR flexfax (1),
.IR sendfax (1)
