.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/faxd.1m,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:10 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH FAXD 1M "October 1, 1993"
.SH NAME
faxd \- facsimile server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ${USRETC}/faxd
[
.B \-1
] [
.B \-d
] [
.B \-q
.I queue-dir
] [
.B \-g
.I getty-speed
] [
.B \-i
.I requeue-interval
]
.B \-m
.I device
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Faxd
is the central processing agent of the
.I FlexFAX
facsimile service.
One
.I faxd
process is started for each facsimile modem on a machine,
typically by
.IR init (1M).
.I Faxd
listens to its facsimile modem for phone calls
and to two
.SM FIFO
files on which it accepts command directives.
.SH OPTIONS
The
.B \-m
option must be used to specify the terminal device that the
facsimile modem is attached to.
.PP
The
.B \-q
option can be used to specify a spooling area in which
to operate other than
.IR ${SPOOL} .
.PP
The
.B \-i
option can be used to specify the interval, in seconds,
that a job should be held between transmission attempts.
By default, this interval is 15*60 seconds (i.e. 15 minutes).
.PP
The
.B \-g
option can be used to indicate that
.I faxd
should act like the
.IR getty (1M)
program if it receives a phone call from a data modem.
The
.I getty-speed
parameter is a label to a speed and tty definitions file;
see the
.I getty
manual page for details.
If this option is not specified and the server is not
configured to support incoming data connections,
incoming data connections will be rejected.
.PP
The
.B \-d
stops
.I faxd
from detaching itself from the terminal; this is useful
for debugging.
.PP
The
.B \-1
option causes
.I faxd
to generate only 1D-encoded facsimile when sending.
.SH FILES
Consult
.IR intro (4F)
for a complete discussion of the structure and
content of the spooling area.
.SH BUGS
There is no way to abort an incoming facsimile.
The queue manager desparately needs a rewrite.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR getty (1M),
.IR intro (4F),
.IR config (4F)
