.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/faxmail.1,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:10 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH FAXMAIL 1 "May 12, 1993"
.SH NAME
faxmail \- convert a mail message to PostScript\(tm for sending as facsimile
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faxmail
[
.B \-b
.I bold-font
] [
.B \-i
.I italic-font
] [
.B \-f
.I font-name
] [
.B \-F
.I font-file
] [
.B -p
.IR pointsize
] [
.B \-n
] [
.B \-s
.I pagesize-name
] [
.B \-w
] [
.B \-1234
] [
.B \-x
.I x-margin
] [
.B \-y
.I y-margin
] [
.B \-H
.I page-height
] [
.B \-W
.I page-width
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Faxmail
takes an electronic mail message on standard input
and generates a PostScript\(tm
document on the standard output that is suitable
for transmission as a facsimile.
The resultant document fills the area of a default page and
is created in a stylized format that is described below.
.I Faxmail
is intended to be invoked directly by the mail system.
For example, mail aliases may be created to automatically
transmit electronic mail; e.g.
.PP
.nf
.ti +0.5i
sam: "|${BIN}/faxmail | ${BIN}/sendfax \-d sam@5551212 \-n"
.fi
.PP
.I Faxmail
formats a mail message according to the following rules.
First, it strips all header information except the following:
.nf
.in +0.5i
.ta \w'Keywords    'u +\w'Keywords    'u +\w'Keywords    'u
From	To	Cc	Subject
Date	Summary	Keywords
.in -0.5i
.fi
.PP
(The 
.I Summary
and
.I Keywords
header lines are useful when forwarding news articles.)
Header lines that are kept have the 
.I tag
set in a ``Helvetica-Bold'' font and the
.I value
set in a ``Helvetica-Oblique'' font.
The
.B \-b
and
.B \-i
options can be used to override the bold and italic
fonts used to set the header lines.
.PP
The body of the mail message is wrapped at line boundaries
(unless the
.B \-w
option is specified) and set in a 
.IR "body font" .
By default,
.I faxmail
searches for a file containing a personalized body font
by using the account name specified in the
.I From
address line of the header.
If a
.I From
line is found,
.I faxmail
will look for a file 
.I .faxfont.ps
in the sender's home directory.
This file should contain a PostScript
description for a font whose name is the name of the account.
For example, if the following line, is encountered,
.PP
.ti +0.5i
From: Sam Leffler <sam@sgi.com>
.PP
.I faxmail
will look for the file
.I ~sam/.faxfont.ps
on the current machine.
If this file exists, it should contain a description for
a font named ``sam''.
.PP
If no personalized body font is found, or if the
.B \-n
option is specified on the command line,
.I faxmail
will set the body of the mail message in a ``Courier-Bold'' font.
The
.B \-f
option can be used to specify an alternate default
PostScript font name to use.
The
.B \-F
option can be used to specify the name of a file containing a
PostScript font description.
In the latter case, the font's PostScript name should be the
same as the filename; e.g.
.I "/tmp/MyFont.ps"
must define a font named ``MyFont''.
.PP
By default,
.I faxmail
sets all text in 12 point type on an 8.5" by 11" page
with .5" top and bottom margins and .35" left and right
hand margins.
The
.B \-p
option may be used to specify an alternate point size.
The
.B \-x
and
.B \-y
options can be used to specify alternate margins (in inches).
The
.B \-s
option can be used to specify a non-default page size by name
or the
.B \-W
and
.B \-H
options can be used to specify specific page dimensions in inches.
.PP
.I Faxmail
can also format multiple pages of text in an 
.IR n -up
format; where
.I n
is 1, 2, 3, or 4.
That is, 1-up generates 1 ouput page per input page
(default),
2-up generates 1 output page for each 4 input pages,
3-up generates 1 output page for each 9 input pages,
and
4-up generates 1 output page for reach 16 input pages.
.SH NOTES
The personalized body fonts are intended to be
fonts that represent a person's handwriting.
As such, 
.I faxmail
should inject some randomness into the formatting of
the body in order to make the result look more realistic.
.SH BUGS
The set of header lines accepted and stripped is fixed.
The rule for deducing body font names can be error prone
(it depends on the user's account name).
It would be nice to set some of the formatting parameters,
such as the 
.IR n -up
control, according to header information.
.SH FILES
.ta \w'${LIBDATA}/pagesizes    'u
${LIBDATA}/pagesizes	page size database
.br
${AFMDIR}	for font metrics
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR flexfax (1),
.IR sendfax (1)
