.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/faxrm.1,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:11 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH FAXRM 1 "January 15, 1993"
.SH NAME
faxrm \- remove a facsimile job queued for transmission
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faxrm
[
.B \-h
.I hostname
]
.IR jobid ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Faxrm
removes one or more facsimile jobs that
are queued for transmission.
If a job that is to be removed is being processed by a server,
it is first aborted.
.PP
A 
.I jobid
is the number printed by
.IR sendfax (1)
when a job is queued for transmission.
This number can also be obtained from
.IR faxstat (1).
.PP
Users can only remove jobs that they
have queued;
except the
.I fax
user who can remove any job.
.PP
By default,
.I faxrm
contacts the facsimile server on the host specified
in the
.B FAXSERVER
environment variable.
This can be overridden with the
.B \-h
option.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.B "Job %s removed." 
A confirmation that the operation was completed successfully.
.PP
.B "Job %s not removed: it was not queued."
The specified job was not found in the server's queue.
.PP
.B "Job %s not removed: open failed; check SYSLOG."
.I or
.B "Job %s not removed: unlink failed; check SYSLOG."
The server was unable to do some necessary operation on the 
remote host and so could not remove the job.
More information about what went wrong can be found in the
.IR syslogd (1M)
log file on the server's machine.
.PP
.B "Document for job %s not removed: unlink failed; check SYSLOG."
The job description file was removed, but one or
more of the associated document files was not.
More information can be found in the log file on the server's machine.
.PP
.B "Job %s not removed: could not establish server process owner."
A request was made by the ``fax'' user to remove
a job that it did submit.
This request was not accepted because
the server was unable to deduce the identity under which
it was executing.  That is, there was no password file
entry for the server's effective user id.
This (usually) indicates that the entry in the file
.I ${USRETC}/inetd.conf
on the remove machine is setup wrong; see
.IR faxd.recv (1M)
for more information.
.PP
.B "Job %s not removed: you neither own it nor are the fax user."
A request was made to remove a job that the user does not own
(and the user is not the ``fax'' user).
.SH BUGS
.I Faxrm
must be run on the same host on which the job was
submitted.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR flexfax (1),
.IR sendfax (1),
.IR faxalter (1),
.IR faxstat (1),
.IR faxd.recv (1M)
