.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/faxstat.1,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:11 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH FAXSTAT 1 "May 12, 1993"
.SH NAME
faxstat \- display facsimile server status
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faxstat
[
.B \-h
.I hostname
] [
.B \-u
.I username
] [
.B \-a
] [
.B \-r
] [
.B \-s
] [
.B \-v
] [
.B \-D
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Faxstat
reports the status of a fascimile server, including (potentially)
the status of the send and receive queues.
Server status information indicates the state of the
server (idle, sending, receiving, etc.)
and the phone number that is associated with the fax modem.
The send queue report gives the status of facsimile jobs
queued for transmission:
.IP \(bu
the job identifier,
.IP \(bu
the modem the job is bound to (or ``any'' if the job
can be sent though any modem),
.IP \(bu
the destination (phone number) of the job,
.IP \(bu
the time to send the job, or a blank field if the job is being
processed or is to be sent immediately,
.IP \(bu
the senders' name,
.IP \(bu
and status information about the job (typically the reason why
a previous attempt failed).
.PP
The receive queue report lists the facsimile documents
that have been received and are awaiting delivery; it
includes:
.IP \(bu
the phone number of the sender (if supplied),
.IP \(bu
the date and time at which the job was received,
.IP \(bu
the number of pages and their size,
.IP \(bu
and the quality (resolution) at which the document was transmitted.
.PP
When invoked without options,
.I faxstat
reports status of the server and the status of
jobs queued by the user that ran the program.
If the
.B \-r
option is specified, the receive queue status is also displayed.
Status of jobs submitted by specific users can be obtained with the
.B \-u
option.
Status of all jobs queued for transmission
is reported if the
.B \-a
option is supplied.
The send queue status can also be suppressed by specifying the
.B \-s
option.
.PP
By default
.I faxstat
reports status for the facsimile servers located on
the host specified in the
.B FAXSERVER
environment variable.
Alternate hosts may be given with one or more uses of the
.B \-h
option.
.PP
The
.B \-D
option is used for debugging
.IR faxstat ;
it causes
.I faxstat
to obtain protocol information from the standard input,
rather than from a server process.
The
.B \-v
option causes the protocol exchanges between
.I faxstat
and the
.I faxd.recv
server processes to be traced on the standard output.
.SH FILES
.ta \w'${LIBDATA}/pagesizes    'u
${LIBDATA}/pagesizes	page size database
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR flexfax (1),
.IR sendfax (1),
.IR faxalter (1),
.IR faxrm (1)
