.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/hosts.4f,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:11 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH HOSTS 4F "January 23, 1993"
.SH NAME
hosts \- host name data base
.SH DESCRIPTION
The file
.B etc/hosts
in the
.I FlexFAX
spooling area contains the specification of the
hosts and users that are permitted to submit
facsimile jobs for transmission.
Note that this information must exist for jobs
to be queued for transmission.
.PP
Host and user specifications are given as regular
expressions that are matched against the string
``\fIuser\fP@\fIhost\fP'' where
.I user
is the
.I userID
string passed to
.IR faxd.recv (1M)
and
.I host
is either the official host name or the
.SM DARPA
Internet address, specified in ``dot notation''.
If a regular expression has a leading ``!'', then
it is interpreted as a class of hosts and users to
which access is to be disallowed.
That is, if the pattern matches the client information,
then access is denied.
.PP
Each regular expression pattern must appear on a line by itself.
Trailing white space is ignored.
Comments are introduced with the ``#'' character and extend
to the end of the line.
For backwards compatibility, host name patterns without a
user specification are interpreted as ``.*@\fIhost\fP'';
i.e. any user on that host may submit a jobs for transmission.
.PP
The following is a sample hosts file.
.sp .5
.nf
.in +0.5i
.ft C
.ta \w'oxford.Berkeley.EDU    'u
127.0.0.1	# anyone coming through local host
sam@flake.*sgi.com	# Sam on his work machine
sam@oxford.*Berkeley.*	# Sam on his machine at home
\&.*@.*.\e.esd\e..*	# anyone in the esd domain
!tom@.*	# Tom Davis is denied access,
\&.*\e.sgi.com	# but anyone else at sgi is ok
.ft P
.fi
.in -0.5i
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR sendfax (1),
.IR faxd.recv (1M),
.IR intro (4F)
