.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/info.4f,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:11 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH INFO 4F "September 12, 1993"
.SH NAME
info \- remote facsimile machine capability database
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B info
subdirectory in the
.I FlexFAX
spooling area holds information about the capabilities
and status of facsimile machines that have been called.
One file exists for each machine, with the filename
created from the remote machine's fully-qualified
phone number.
Files have a simple
.SM ASCII
format.
Each line is of the form
.sp .5
.ti +0.5i
[\fB&\fP]\fBtag\fP: \fIvalue\fP
.br
.sp .5
where a \fItag\fP identifies a capability and a \fIvalue\fP
is either a string, number, or boolean value.
An optional ``&'' at the front of the line indicates that the
tag's value is
.I "locked down"
and should not be updated by the server.
This facility is useful for restricting the capabilities used
with a particular machine.
.PP
The following items are recorded:
.in +0.5i
.sp .5
.ta \w'supports2DEncoding    'u +\w'boolean    'u
.nf
\fBTag	Type	Description\fP
calledBefore	boolean	fax machine has previously answered at this number
dialFailures	number	count of consecutive failed dial operations
lastDialFailure	string	reason for last failed dial operation
lastSendFailure	string	reason for last failed send attempt
maxPageWidth	number	maximum page width in pixels
maxPageLength	number	maximum page length in millimeters
maxSignallingRate	string	maximum signalling rate (bits/sec) to use
jobInProgress	string	current job sending to remote machine
rejectNotice	string	reject outgoing jobs and return notice string
remoteCSI	string	remote machine Called Subscriber Identification
sendFailures	number	count of consecutive failed send attempts
supportsHighRes	boolean	accepts 196 line/inch images
supports2DEncoding	boolean	accepts Group 2D encoding
supportsPostScript	boolean	accepts Adobe PostScript transfer protocol
.fi
.in -0.5i
.PP
The facsimile server,
.IR faxd (1M),
uses the information stored in this directory when
deciding if a call should be placed and when
preparing documents for transmission.
If multiple jobs are queued for the same destination, the
jobs will be serialized to avoid contention.
Also, if a call fails in such a way that subsequent calls
should not be attempted, the server will install a
.I rejectNotice
that will cause subsequent attempts to send to that destination
to be aborted (note that this is similar to the 
.I rejectNotice
item that may be manually placed in the parallel
.IR cinfo (4F)
file).
If a remote machine's capabilities are known, then
documents are prepared according to the capabilities.
Otherwise, documents are prepared using only the
minimum capabilities required by the Group 3
standard\(em 1D encoding, 98 lines/inch, and
.SM "ISO A4"
page dimensions.
.PP
The
.I calledBefore
item is used by the facsimile server is used in deciding whether
or not to redial a phone number when encountering certain errors.
For example, if a dialing command results in a ``\s-1NO CARRIER\s+1''
result, then the number will not be retried unless
the number has previously been dialed successfully.
.SH NOTES
.I Faxd
automatically creates and updates entries in the
.B info
directory, as required.
.PP
The data in this directory is simply a
.I cache
of remote capabilities and, except for locked down items, can be
safely purged at any time.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR faxd (1M),
.IR cinfo (4F)
