.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/log.4f,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:12 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH LOG 4F "January 15, 1993"
.SH NAME
log/* \- session log files
.SH DESCRIPTION
Files in the
.B etc/log
directory in the
.I FlexFAX
spooling area contain logging/tracing information about
transmit and receive sessions.
One file exists for each machine, with the filename
created from the remote machine's fully-qualified
phone number.
Transmit session tracing is placed in the file named by
the destination phone number.
Receive session tracing is placed in the file whose name
is the ``local phone number''.
The amount and kind of tracing information that is recorded
is defined by the
.B SessionTracing
parameter specified in the modem configuration file; see
.IR config (4F).
.SH "SERVER OPERATION"
The following messages may appear when server operation tracing
(bit 1) is enabled:
.PP
\fB"MODEM: Unknown hint "%s" ignored"\fP.
.PP
\fB"MODEM %s %s/%s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"%s: Can not lock device."\fP.
.PP
\fB"%s: Can not open modem (%m)"\fP.
.PP
\fB"%s: Can not open modem (timed out)."\fP.
.PP
\fB"%s: setuid root failed (%m)"\fP.
.PP
\fB"%s: fcntl: %m"\fP.
.PP
\fB"%s: Can not deduce modem type."\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: Permission denied (unacceptable client TSI)"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: Unable to create file "%s" for received data"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV data in "%s""\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: empty file "%s" deleted"\fP.
.PP
\fB"ACCEPT TSI "%s""\fP.
.PP
\fB"REJECT TSI "%s""\fP.
.PP
\fB"POLL with CIG "%s""\fP.
.PP
\fB"POLL: Unable to create file "%s" for received data"\fP.
.PP
\fB"POLL: empty file "%s" deleted"\fP.
.PP
\fB"internal muckup, lost polling request"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND FAILED: %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND file "%s""\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND: %s "%s", dirnum %d"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND: %s (file %s, compression %d)"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REJECT: %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REJECT: %s, max remote page width %u, image width %lu"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REJECT: %s, image resolution %g line/mm"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REJECT: %s, max remote page length %d, image length %lu"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REJECT: %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"STATE CHANGE: %s -> %s (timeout %ld)"\fP.
.PP
\fB"STATE CHANGE: %s -> %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"ANSWER: FAX CONNECTION"\fP.
.PP
\fB"ANSWER: DATA CONNECTION"\fP.
.PP
\fB"ANSWER: Could not switch modem to data service"\fP.
.PP
\fB"ANSWER: VOICE CONNECTION"\fP.
.PP
\fB"ANSWER: %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"ANSWER: Can not lock modem device"\fP.
.PP
\fB"GETTY: start pid %u, \"%s\""\fP.
.PP
\fB"GETTY: terminated, exit status %#o"\fP.
.PP
\fB"GETTY: could not create"\fP.
.PP
\fB"GETTY: can not fork"\fP.
.PP
\fB"runGetty::setregid: %m"\fP.
.PP
\fB"runGetty::setreuid: %m"\fP.
.PP
\fB"No support for XON/XOFF flow control with Class 1 driver"\fP.
.PP
\fB"No support for RTS/CTS flow control with Everex driver"\fP.
.SH "FAX PROTOCOL"
The following messages may appear when the facsimile protocol tracing
(bit 2) is enabled:
.PP
\fB"%s: %s (Phase B)"\fP.
An error occurred during Phase B of Group 3 protocol processing.
.PP
\fB"DELAY %u ms"\fP.
A %u-millisecond delay was done on the host.
.PP
\fB"DIAL %s"\fP.
The phone number %s was dialed.  Note that this is the 
phone number passed as an argument to the
.I ModemDialCmd
parameter and so may not include additional
dialing prefixes sent to the modem.
.PP
\fB"Error sending T.30 prologue frames"\fP.
An error occurred while trying to transmit the
.SM "T.30 DCS"
frames.
.PP
\fB"HDLC frame too short (%u bytes)"\fP.
An
.SM HDLC
protocol message was not at least 3 bytes long.
.PP
\fB"HDLC frame with bad address field %#x"\fP.
An
.SM HDLC
protocol message was sent/received with an address field other
than 0xff.
.PP
\fB"HDLC frame with bad control field %#x"\fP.
An
.SM HDLC
protocol message was sent/received with an invalid
control field.
.PP
\fB"MODEM ERROR: %s"\fP.
While waiting for a modem response/result an error was
encountered (e.g. an ``\s-1ERROR\s+1'' result code).
.PP
\fB"MODEM protocol botch (\"%s\"), %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"MODEM protocol botch, can not parse \"%s\""\fP.
.PP
\fB"MODEM protocol botch: +FET: without +FPTS:"\fP.
.PP
\fB"POLL: %s (begin)"\fP.
.PP
\fB"POLL: %s (end)"\fP.
.PP
\fB"POLL: begin"\fP.
.PP
\fB"POLL: end"\fP.
.PP
\fB"Problem receiving post-page HDLC frame"\fP.
.PP
\fB"Problem sending TCF data"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV PPM: %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV PPR: %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV interrupt request ignored"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV training"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV unknown PPM %#x"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: %d bytes of data"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: %lu bytes, %lu rows"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: %s (begin)"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: %s (end)"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: TCF %u bytes, %u%% non-zero, %u zero-run"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: bad code word 0x%x, len %d, row %lu"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: begin"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: end"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: begin page"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: end page"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: premature EOF"\fP.
.PP
\fB"RECV: row %lu, got EOL, eols %d"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE %s PostScript transfer"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE CSI \"%s\""\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE HANGUP: %s (code %s)"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE NSF %#x"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE NSS \"%s\""\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE TSI \"%s\""\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE best format %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE best rate %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE best vres %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE has document to POLL"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE max %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"REMOTE wants %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND %s RTC", is2D ? "2D" : "1D"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND begin page"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND end page"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND recv %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND recv unknown FCF %#x"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND training at %s"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SEND training"\fP.
.PP
\fB"SENT %u bytes of data"\fP.
.PP
\fB"TRAINING failed"\fP.
.PP
\fB"TRAINING succeeded"\fP.
.PP
\fB"USE %s"\fP.
.PP
.SH "MODEM OPERATIONS"
The following messages may appear when modem operation tracing
(bit 3) is enabled:
.PP
\fB"MODEM line set to %d baud (input XON/XOFF %s)"\fP.
The
.SM DTE-DCE
communication rate was set %d bits/sec on the host and software
flow control for data received from the modem was either enabled
or disabled.
.PP
\fB"MODEM input XON/XOFF enabled"\fP.
\fB"MODEM input XON/XOFF disabled"\fP.
Software flow control for data received from the modem was
either enabled or disabled.
.PP
\fB"<-- break"\fP.
A break signal was sent to the modem.
At present only the Everex modem driver sends breaks.
.PP
\fB"TIMEOUT: %s modem"\fP.
A timeout occurred while doing a modem-related operation; typically
reading or writing data.
.PP
\fB"Error #%u reading from modem"\fP.
An error was returned by a 
.IR read (2)
system call.
This usually happens when the modem prematurely drops the
.SM DCD
signal.
.SH "MODEM COMMUNICATION"
The following messages may appear when modem communication tracing
(bit 4) is enabled:
.PP
\fB"--> [%d:%s]"\fP.
A %d-byte line of data was received from the modem.
Printable data are displayed.
.PP
\fB"<-- data [%d]"\fP.
%d bytes of unprintable data were sent to the modem, typically
facsimile data.
.PP
\fB"<-- [%d:%s]"\fP.
%d bytes of printable data were sent to the modem.
The data are displayed.
.SH "TIMEOUTS"
The following messages may appear when timeout tracing (bit 5) is enabled:
.PP
\fB"start %d second timer"\fP.
Start a %d-second timeout.
.PP
\fB"stop timer"\fP.
Stop the current timeout before it expires.
.PP
\fB"stop timer - timer expired"\fP.
The current timeout expired.
.SH "HDLC FRAMES"
When tracing of raw
.SM HDLC
frames (bit 6) is enabled each frame sent and received is logged:
\fB"<-- HDLC<%u:%.*s>"\fP
for sent frames and
\fB"--> HDLC<%u:%.*s>"\fP
for received frames.
These messages indicate that a %u-byte long
.SM HDLC
frame was sent or received.
The first byte should always be 0xff, the address field specified
for dialup communication.
The second byte should be a frame control field.
The contents of the frame is displayed as sequence of bytes in hexadecimal.
.SH "BINARY I/O"
When binary input/output (bit 7) is traced there are two types of messages
logged:
.PP
\fB"<-- <%u:%.*s>"\fP
for data sent to the modem and
\fB"--> <%u:%.*s>"\fP
for data received from the modem.
Each message indicates that %u bytes of data were transferred.
The data is displayed as a sequence of bytes in hexadecimal.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR faxd (1M),
.IR config (4F)
