.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/ps2fax.1m,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:12 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH PS2FAX 1M "January 15, 1993"
.SH NAME
ps2fax \- image PostScript\(tm for facsimile transmission
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ${SPOOL}/bin/ps2fax
[
.B \-12
] [
.B \-o
.I output
] [
.B \-w
.I pagewidth
] [
.B \-l
.I pagelength
] [
.B \-r
.I vertres
] [
.IR files ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Ps2fax
takes PostScript input and generates a
.SM TIFF
Class F image file suitable for facsimile transmission.
It is usually invoked by a facsimile server process.
On
.SM IRIX
version 4.0-based systems,
this application is based on Adobe's Display PostScript software.
.PP
Input files containing PostScript may be specified on the
command line.
If none are given, then
.I ps2fax
will read from standard input.
.PP
By default,
.I ps2fax
will generate a 98 line/inch output document whose
page width is 1728 pixels and page length is 297 mm
(a standard A4 page at low resolution).
Horizontal resolution is always 204 dpi.
The
.B \-r
option can be used to specifiy an alternate vertical
resolution (typically 196 lpi for 
.I fine
resolution).
The page width and page length can be specified with the
.B \-w
and
.B \-l
options, respectively.
Note that page width is specified in pixels, while
page length is specified in millimeters.
.PP
The
.B \-o
option is used to specify the name of the output file.
If no filename is given, the output is placed in a file
named
.BR ps.fax .
.PP
By default, output is compressed using the standard
Group 3 1D encoding scheme, with
.SM EOL
codes padded to byte boundaries.
If the
.B \-2
option is specified, output is encoded with the optional
Group 3 2D encoding scheme (\c
.SM EOL
codes are still padded to byte boundaries).
1D encoding can also be explicitly specified with the
.B \-1
option.
.SH "RUNTIME ENVIRONMENT"
Before user-supplied PostScript is passed
to the PostScript interpreter, a limited number of
operators are defined.
These operators are operators commonly found in a
LaserWriter printer and (sometimes) generated by Macintosh-based
applications.
.PP
The default environment includes support for the following
Adobe Type 1 fonts:
.sp .5
.in +0.5i
.ta \w'Helvetica-Narrow-BoldOblique    'u
.nf
AvantGarde-Book	Helvetica-Narrow-Oblique
AvantGarde-BookOblique	Lithos-Bold
AvantGarde-Demi	NewCenturySchlbk-Bold
AvantGarde-DemiOblique	NewCenturySchlbk-BoldItalic
Bookman-Demi	NewCenturySchlbk-Italic
Bookman-DemiItalic	NewCenturySchlbk-Roman
Bookman-Light	Palatino-Bold
Bookman-LightItalic	Palatino-BoldItalic
Courier	Palatino-Italic
Courier-Bold	Palatino-Roman
Courier-BoldOblique	StoneSerif
Courier-Oblique	Symbol
Helvetica	Tekton
Helvetica-Bold	Times-Bold
Helvetica-BoldOblique	Times-BoldItalic
Helvetica-Oblique	Times-Italic
Helvetica-Narrow	Times-Roman
Helvetica-Narrow-Bold	ZapfChancery-MediumItalic
Helvetica-Narrow-BoldOblique	ZapfDingbats
.in -0.5i
.fi
.sp .5
Note that this is the same set of fonts supported by the
.SM DPS
extension to the X server.
.SH FILES
.ta \w'${SPOOL}/etc/dpsprinter.ps    'u
.nf
${SPOOL}/etc/dpsprinter.ps	PostScript code read at startup for \s-1DPS\s+1
/usr/lib/DPS/default.dps_vm	startup VM file for \s-1DPS\s+1
/usr/lib/DPS/outline	Type 1 fonts for \s-1DPS\s+1
/usr/lib/DPS/prebuilt	prebuilt versions of fonts for \s-1DPS\s+1
.fi
.SH BUGS
Output from the Display PostScript version of this command
is encoded according to the Display PostScript binary encoding
protocol.
.PP
No prebuilt bitmap fonts are currently available.
This would greatly improve legibility at low resolutions,
as the rendering of outline fonts at 98 lpi is particularly
poor.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR sendfax (1),
.IR faxd (1M),
.IR intro (4F)
