.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/sendfax.1,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:12 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH SENDFAX 1 "July 27, 1993"
.SH NAME
sendfax \- submit a facsimile job for transmission
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sendfax
[
.B \-a
.I transmit-time
] [
.B \-c
.I comments
] [
.B \-r
.I regarding
] [
.B \-x
.I to-company
] [
.B \-y
.I to-location
] [
.B \-d
.I destination
] [
.B \-f
.I from
] [
.B \-h
.IR host [ :modem ]
] [
.B \-i
.I identifier
] [
.B \-k
.I kill-time
] [
.B \-lm
] [
.B \-n
] [
.B \-p
] [
.B \-s
.I pagesize-name
] [
.B \-t
.I tries
] [
.B \-v
] [
.B \-DR
] [
.IR files ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Sendfax
submits one or more facsimile transmission requests
to a 
.I FlexFAX
facsimile server.
Requests are normally processed immediately, although
they may also be queued for transmission at a later time
using a syntax identical to the
.IR at (1)
command.
For each job that is queued,
.I sendfax
prints a
.I "job identifier"
on the standard output.
This number can be supplied to the
.IR faxrm (1)
command to remove the job or to the
.IR faxalter (1)
command to alter certain of its parameters.
.PP
Facsimile documents are made from the concatenation
of one or more files specified on the command line.
If no files are supplied,
.I sendfax
reads data from the standard input unless polling is requested (see below).
.I Sendfax
passes PostScript\(tm and
.SM TIFF
Class F documents directly through to the fax server for transmission,
and attempts to convert other file formats to either PostScript or
.SM TIFF.
In normal operation
.I sendfax
automatically converts
.SM ASCII\c
-text,
.IR troff (1)
output,
and
Silicon Graphics format images for transmission.
Support for other file formats can be easily added
through an extensible file typing and conversion facility; see
.IR typerules (4F).
Note that since
.SM TIFF
Class F documents are processed directly it is simple to forward
a received facsimile.
.PP
By default,
.I sendfax
will generate a cover page for each
facsimile that is to be transmitted.
This cover page is created by the ancillary
.IR faxcover (1)
program using information deduced by
.I sendfax
and by information supplied on the command line:
the
.B \-x
option is used to specify the receiver's company,
the
.B \-y
option is used to specify the receiver's geographical location,
the
.B \-c
option is used to specify a 
.I comments
field, the
.B \-r
option is used to specifiy a ``Re:'' subject, and,
if a destination is specified as
.IR user@fax-number ,
the
.I user
string will be passed to
.I faxcover
as the identify of the recepient.
Note that the above options must
.I precede
the
.B \-d
option on the command line.
Note also, that multi-word names must be enclosed in quote marks;
for example,
``Sam Leff\&ler@+1.415.555.1212''.
See
.I faxcover
for more information about how cover pages are created.
If no cover page is desired, for example because
it is already included in the document, the
.B \-n
option should be specified.
.PP
In addition to sending documents,
.I sendfax
can be used to effect polling of a remote facsimile machine.
If the
.B \-p
option is specified, a polling request will be submitted.
If a poll request is made in conjunction with the transmission
of documents, the poll request will take place after the documents
are transmitted.
Documents retrieved by polling are returned to the requestor
by electronic mail and may be viewed with a suitable viewer program.
.PP
A destination is the dialing string to use to contact
the remote fax machine.
Phone numbers may include non-numeric characters for
readability\(em only digits and ``+'' (\fBfor denoting a
country code\fP) are significant in placing a call.
Dialing prefixes, such as ``1'' and ``011''
(for long distance calling in the United States) need
not be included if an unambigous number is specified.
Examples of unambiguous phone numbers are:
.nf
.sp .5
.in +0.5i
.ta \w'+31.77.594.313    'u
\+31.77.594.131	\fIto call the Netherlands\fP
+14159657824	\fIto call California\fP
9657824	\fIto make a local call\fP
1-215-356-1666	\fIto call Pennsylvania from within the US\fP
.in -0.5i
.sp .5
.fi
Non-numeric strings, such as ``*70'' (to defeat
call waiting), may be included in the destination phone number.
Whether or not they are stripped from the string used to
dial the destination fax machine is configuration-specific.
.PP
By default, a facsimile is sent at low
resolution (98 lines/inch).
Medium resolution (196 lines/inch), often
called
.IR "fine mode" ,
can be requested with the
.B \-m
option.
Low resolution can also be explicitly requested with the
.B \-l
option.
.PP
Facsimile are normally imaged in system-default page size
(usually letter-size pages, 8.5" by 11", for sites in North America).
Alternate page sizes can be specified with the
.B \-s
option.
Well known page sizes include:
ISO A3,
ISO A4,
ISO A5,
ISO A6,
ISO B4,
North American Letter,
American Legal,
American Ledger,
American Executive,
Japanese Letter,
and
Japanese Legal.
Note that it may not be permissible to image into the
full page area; the guaranteed reproduceable area for a page is 
typically smaller.
Also, note that while arbitrary page sizes can be specified to
.IR sendfax ,
only a limited number of page dimensions are supported by the
Group 3 facsimile protocol.
Thus if an odd-size facsimile is submitted for transmission
it may not be possible to determine if it can be sent
until the fax server establishes communication
with the remote facsimile machine.
.PP
By default,
.I sendfax
uses the
.B FAXSERVER
environment variable to identify the facsimile server to
which the job should be directed.
This can be overridden with a
.B \-h
option.
The server specified with the 
.B \-h
option and by the environment variable is a host name or
address and, optionally, a modem identifier (if a specific
modem is to be used).
To syntax for the latter is either \fIhost\fP:\fBmodem\fP
or \fBmodem\fP@\fIhost\fP; e.g. ``ttym2@oxford.berkeley.edu''.
If no modem is specified, the job will be submitted to any
available modem.
.PP
If the first attempt to send a facsimile is
unsuccessful,
.I FlexFAX
will periodically try to resend the facsimile.
By default, 
.I FlexFAX
will try to transmit the facsimile for one day from the time
of the initial transmission.
The
.B \-k
option can be used to specified an alternate time
for killing the job.
This time is specified using notation compatible with
.IR at (1)
and as a time relative to the time of the initial transmission
attempt.
Thus, for example, the default kill time is specified as
``now +1 day'' (one day from the current time).
To retry for an hour, ``now +1 hour'' could be used.
The
.B \-t
option can also be used to specify a maximum number of times
that the facsimile system should try to send the job.
.PP
If an error is encountered while processing a job, the
facsimile server will send an electronic mail message to
the account that submitted the job.
If the
.B \-D
option is specified,
.I FlexFAX
will also notify the account by mail when the job is
completed.
In addition, if the
.B \-R
option is specified, notification will also be returned any
time the job must be requeued for retransmission.
Notification messages identify a job by its job identifier.
An arbitary identification string can be specified instead
with the
.B \-i
option.
.PP
If the
.B \-v
option is specified,
.I sendfax
will print information on the standard output
about each conversion and cover sheet
generation operation it does.
If this option is specified twice, the protocol
between
.I sendfax
and the
.I faxd.recv
server processes that do the submission work on the
remote machines will also be displayed.
.PP
In normal operation the sender's identity for
submitted jobs is set according to the user that
invoked
.IR sendfax .
In some instances, however, it is useful to
override this procedure and explicitly specify the 
sender's identity.
The
.B \-f
option can be used to explicitly specify a sender's identity if 
.I sendfax
is invoked by the root, daemon, or uucp user.
The information specified with the
.B \-f
option can be a full ``From::'' line;
e.g. ``Joe Blow <joe@foo.com>''
and ``joe@foo.com (Joe Blow)'' are acceptable.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The following messages are generated because of problems
encountered on the local machine.
.PP
.B "Could not call server."
The facsimile server on the remote machine did not respond.
.PP
.B "No input data; tranmission aborted."
No data was supplied (typically on the standard input).
No facsimile will be sent.
.PP
.B "Error converting data; command was "%s."
A data conversion operation failed; the shell
command that was used is printed.
.PP
.B "Can not convert %s."
Data needed to be converted for transmission, but the
required conversion rule was not located.
This may indicate that the 
.I FlexFAX
software was incorrectly installed; or perhaps
that an
.SM NFS\c
-mounted directory is temporarily unavailable.
.PP
.B "%s: Can not determine file type."
.I sendfax
was unable to deduce the type of the file.
.PP
.B "%s: Not a regular file."
The file is something other than a regular file; for
example, a directory.
.PP
The following messages may be printed by
.IR sendfax .
These messages describe problems encountered by
the server process on the remote machine.
This list is incomplete;
other messages may be generated by the server under
unusual circumstances\(em consult
.IR faxd.recv (1M)
for the complete list.
.PP
.B "Warning, no server appears to be running."
This is an information message that indicates the
job was queued for processing, but that no facsimile
server(s) appear to be running.
.PP
.B "Write error."
.I faxd.recv
encountered an I/O error while receiving a document
to transmit.
.PP
.B "Can not get your network address."
.I faxd.recv
was unable to get the client's machine name in order
to verify the client is allowed to submit a job.
.PP
.B "The server does not have a permissions file."
The facsimile server is missing the file
.BR etc/hosts .
This file must be present and contain a list of the
hosts that are allowed to submit jobs.
.PP
.B "Your host does not have permission to use the fax server."
The client's host is not permitted to submit jobs to this server.
Only those hosts listed in the file
.B etc/hosts
on the server machine are permitted to submit jobs.
.SH FILES
.ta \w'${LIBDATA}/typerules    'u
.nf
${LIBDATA}/typerules	file type and conversion rules
${LIBDATA}/pagesizes	page size database
${LIBDATA}/dialrules	optional client dialstring rules
${BIN}/faxcover	for generating cover sheets
/usr/tmp/sndfaxXXXXXX	temporary files
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR at (1),
.IR flexfax (1),
.IR faxalter (1),
.IR faxcover (1),
.IR faxmail (1),
.IR faxrm (1),
.IR faxstat (1),
.IR sgi2fax (1),
.IR faxd (1M),
.IR intro (4F),
.IR typerules (4F)
