.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/sendq.4f,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:13 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH SENDQ 4F "September 22, 1993"
.SH NAME
sendq/q* \- 
.I FlexFAX
facsimile transmission job description
.SH DESCRIPTION
Files in the
.B sendq
directory specify facsimile transmission job requests.
These files are usually created by
.IR faxd.recv (1M),
when submitting a job on behalf of
.IR sendfax (1).
.PP
Job description files are 
.SM ASCII
files with lines of the form
.sp .5
.ti +0.5i
\fBtag\fP: \fIvalue\fP
.sp .5
where a \fItag\fP is one of the identifiers described below
and a \fIvalue\fP is either a string or number.
If a line
.I begins
with the ``#'' character, it is ignored.
String values start at the first non-blank character
after the ``:'' and continue to the end of the line.
Numeric values are either decimal integers or floating point numbers.
.PP
The following table lists the possible tags and the required
type of the associated value.
.sp .5
.in +0.5i
.ta \w'pagelength    'u +\w'integer    'u
.nf
\fBTag	Type	Description\fP
dirnum	integer	directory offset of current page being sent
jobtag	string	user-specified job identifier
killtime	integer	time to give up trying to send facsimile
mailaddr	string	email address of sender
maxdials	integer	max number of times to dial
modem	string	outgoing modem to use
notify	string	email notification specification
npages	integer	number of pages transmitted
ntries	integer	number of attempts to send current page
ndials	integer	number of consecutive failed attempts to place call
number	string	dialstring to use in placing call
external	string	external form of dialstring
pagehandling	string	page analysis information
pagelength	float	facsimile page length (millimeters)
pagewidth	integer	facsimile page width (millimeters)
poll	string	polling request
postscript	string	postscript document specification
resolution	float	vertical resolution of facsimile
sender	string	identity of sender
sendjob	string	\fIat\fP\|(1) job identifier for delayed send job
status	string	job status
tiff	string	\s-2TIFF\s0 document specification
totdials	integer	total number of phone calls
tts	integer	time to send facsimile
.fi
.in -0.5i
.SH "PARAMETERS"
.TP 10
.B dirnum
The directory offset (starting at 0) of the current page
to be sent.
.TP 10
.B external
The external form of the dialstring.
This string is used instead of the dialstring in any status
and log messages.
Clients can protect private information such as access codes
that must be placed in dialstrings by supplying a
``cleansed'' version of the dialstring.
.TP 10
.B jobtag
A user-specified string that is intended for identification purposes.
If this string is defined, it is returned to the user in notification
messages.
.TP 10
.B killtime
The time to kill this job, expressed in seconds
since 00:00:00 GMT, January 1, 1970.
.TP 10
.B mailaddr
The electronic mail address to which notification
messages should be directed.
.TP 10
.B maxdials
The maximum number of times the server should dial the phone.
If the job cannot be completed in this number of calls, it is terminated.
.TP 10
.B modem
The outgoing modem to use to send the facsimile, or ``any''
if 
.I any
modem can be used.
.TP 10
.B notify
A specification of whether the sender wants
notification: whenever the job is requeued after
a failed attempt to transmit (``\c
.IR "when requeued" ''),
when the job is completed (``\c
.IR "when done" ''),
or not at all (``\c
.IR "none" '').
.TP 10
.B npages
The number of pages in the facsimile, including
the cover page, that have been successfully transmitted.
.TP 10
.B ntries
The number of unsucessful
attempts that have been made to transmit
the current page.
.TP 10
.B ndials
The number of consecutive unsucessful
attempts to establish carrier with the
the destination facsimile machine.
.TP 10
.B number
The dialstring to use to call the destination facsimile machine.
.TP 10
.B pagehandling
A string used by the facsimile server during transmission.
The string has one character for each page to be transmitted.
``M'' indicates there is another page to follow and that the page
requires different T.30 session parameters be negotiated (an
.SM EOM
code is to be transmitted).
``S'' indicates there is another page to follow, but the page
uses the same session parameters (an
.SM MPS.
code is to be transmitted).
``P'' indicates this is the last page to be transmitted (an
.SM EOP
code is to be transmitted).
.TP 10
.B pagelength
The desired page length in millimeters.
.TP 10
.B pagewidth
The desired page width in millimeters.
.TP 10
.B poll
The value is a Caller Identification String (\s-2CIS\s+2)
to use in making a polling request.
.TP 10
.B postscript
The value is a pathname to a file containing a
PostScript\(tm document to send.
Files must be owned by the 
.IR "fax user" .
Pathnames must be relative to the top of the
.I FlexFAX
spooling directory and not include ``..''.
.TP 10
.B resolution
The desired vertical resolution in lines per inch.
This value should be either 98 or 196.
.TP 10
.B sender
The ``full name'' of the sender of the facsimile.
.TP 10
.B sendjob
The identifier returned by
.IR at (1)
for the job that is to do a delayed submission
(if any).
.TP 10
.B status
Status information about the current state of the job.
Typically this is the reason why the last attempt to
send the facsimile failed.
.TP 10
.B tiff
The value is a pathname to a file containing a
.SM TIFF
Class F document to send.
Files must be owned by the 
.IR "fax user" .
Pathnames must be relative to the top of the
.I FlexFAX
spooling directory and not include ``..''.
.TP 10
.B totdials
The total number of times the server has dialed the phone.
.TP 10
.B tts
The time to send the facsimile.
If this value is non-zero, it is number of seconds
since 00:00:00 GMT, January 1, 1970.
Otherwise, a value of 0 is interpreted to mean
transmit immediately.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR sendfax (1),
.IR faxd (1M),
.IR faxd.recv (1M)
