.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/sgi2fax.1,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:13 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH SGI2FAX 1 "May 12, 1993"
.SH NAME
sgi2fax \- convert a Silicon Graphics image file for facsimile transmission
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ${LIBEXEC}/sgi2fax
[
.B \-12
] [
.B \-lm
] [
.B \-r
.I %red
] [
.B \-g
.I %green
] [
.B \-b
.I %blue
] [
.B \-o
.I output-file
] [
.B \-s
.I pagesize-name
] [
.B \-v
]
.IR files ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Sgi2fax
is used to convert Silicon Graphics format images to
bilevel
.SM TIFF
Class F images in preparation for transmission as facsimile.
.I Sgi2fax
is not normally invoked directly, but as a result of
supplying an
.SM SGI
image file to
.IR sendfax (1).
.PP
Images are converted by scaling them to fill the guaranteed
reproduceable area on a default page.
Each 
.SM RGB
pixel
.I p
is converted to greyscale according to:
.nf
.sp .5
.ti +0.5i
\fIp\fP\dr\u * %r + \fIp\fP\dg\u * %g + \fIp\fP\db\u * %b
.sp .5
.fi
where %r, %g, and %b default to 30, 59, and 11, respectively.
Greyscale images are passed through a high pass filter
and dithered to a bilevel image.
The resultant images are written as a 
.SM TIFF
Class F document.
.PP
By default, output has a horizontal resolution of 204 dpi
and a vertical resolution of 98 lines/inch.
The vertical resolution can be doubled with the
.B \-m
option.
The
.B \-l
option specifies the default, 98 lpi, resolution.
.PP
The
.BR \-r ,
.BR \-g ,
and
.B \-b
options can be used to specify alternate percentages to use
in converting color values to greyscale.
.PP
By default,
.I sgi2fax
will write the output to a file named
.IR sgi.fax .
An alternate name can be specified with the
.B \-o
option.
.PP
By default, the output image is encoded using Group 3 1D encoding.
1D or 2D encoding can be specified with the
.B \-1
and
.B \-2
options, respectively.
.PP
A non-default page size can be specified with the
.B \-s
option.
.SH FILES
.ta \w'${LIBDATA}/pagezes    'u
${LIBDATA}/pagesizes	page size database
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR flexfax (1),
.IR sendfax (1),
.IR intro (4F)
