.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/transcript.1m,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:13 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH TRANSCRIPT 1M "August 30, 1993"
.SH NAME
transcript \- print a transcript of the last call placed by a \s-1FlexFAX\s+1 server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bin/transcript
.I server-pid
.I number
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bin/transcript
is a command script that prints a transcript of the last phone
call placed to the
.I number
by the server process with process
.SM ID
.IR server-pid .
Transcripts are retrieved from the session log files kept in the
.B log
subdirectory.
Transcripts are only available if session tracing is enabled; see
the description of the
.I SessionTracing
configuration parameter in
.IR config (4F).
.SH NOTES
The default command script will not display timer-related.
Certain messages describing data transfers are also removed
from the displayed transcript in order to make the resultant
scripts more suitable for return to users.
.SH FILES
.nf
.ta \w'log/*    'u
log/*	session logging records
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR faxd (1M),
.IR log (4F)
