.\"	$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/man/xferstats.1m,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:10:13 torek Exp $
.\"
.\" FlexFAX Facsimile Software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Sam Leffler
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software and 
.\" its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided
.\" that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in
.\" all copies of the software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of
.\" Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or
.\" publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written
.\" permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS-IS" AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, 
.\" EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY 
.\" WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
.\" 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND,
.\" OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF 
.\" LIABILITY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH XFERSTATS 1M "August 30, 1993"
.SH NAME
xferstats \- summarize \s-1FlexFAX\s+1 transmission accounting statistics
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bin/xferstats
[
.I \-send*
] [
.I \-csi*
] [
.I \-dest*
] [
.I \-speed
] [
.I \-format
] [
.I files
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I xferstats
is a command script that prints a summary of the
.I FlexFAX
accounting statistics for transmitted jobs.
The statistics can be sorted according to one of several keys:
.nf
.sp .5
.ta \w'\fB\-format\fP    'u
\fB\-send*\fP	by sender's account name (default)
\fB\-csi*\fP	by remote party's \s-1CSI\s+1
\fB\-dest*\fP	by called phone number
\fB\-speed\fP	by communication speed
\fB\-format\fP	by communication data format
.fi
.PP
Statistics are read from the file
.B etc/xferlog
in the spooling area, unless filenames are
specified on the command line.
.PP
The following table is an example of the output from
.I xferstats
(using the default sort key):
.sp .5
.nf
.ta \w'weissman@pianoforte.esd.sgi.com   'u +\w'Pages   'u +\w'15:03:58  'u +\w'Pg/min   'u +\w'Errs   'u +\w'TypRate   'u
\fBDestination	Pages	Time	Pg/min	Errs	TypRate	TypData\fP
alim@ali.asd.sgi.com	2	4:00	0.5	0	9600	1-D	MR
alphonso@nematode.esd.sgi.com	5	3:00	1.7	5	9600	1-D	MR
awhite@hoosac.corp.sgi.com	5	2:39	1.9	1	9600	2-D	MR
efi@midnight.asd.sgi.com	34	38:11	0.9	6	9600	1-D	MR
fredc@cowboy.mfg.sgi.com	291	2:49:11	1.7	58	9600	2-D	MR
glusk@mechcad3.esd.sgi.com	8	4:27	1.8	7	9600	1-D	MR
guest@flake.asd.sgi.com	17	47:44	0.4	51	9600	1-D	MR
kku@chipper.corp.sgi.com	8	3:00	2.7	0	9600	1-D	MR
mkk@imagine.corp.sgi.com	8	1:00	8.0	2	9600	2-D	MR
moreton@skyline.asd.sgi.com	5	12:45	0.4	6	9600	1-D	MR
nancyf@porsche.mfg.sgi.com	19	10:00	1.9	4	9600	1-D	MR
paulh@ohayo.nsg.sgi.com	26	50:55	0.5	31	9600	2-D	MR
paulh@tuba.asd.sgi.com	35	1:51:28	0.3	60	9600	1-D	MR
root@cowboy.mfg.sgi.com	10	5:38	1.8	0	9600	1-D	MR
root@tuba.asd.sgi.com	15	23:07	0.6	10	9600	2-D	MR
rosa@rosa.corp.sgi.com	37	19:00	1.9	11	9600	1-D	MR
sam@eucsun.corp.sgi.com	56	25:51	2.2	6	9600	2-D	MR
sam@flake.asd.sgi.com	1307	15:03:58	1.4	356	9600	1-D	MR
sam@oxford.chez.sgi.com	6	4:10	1.4	0	9600	2-D	MR
seth@flake.asd.sgi.com	59	1:28:09	0.7	83	9600	2-D	MR
subsonic@kenwood.asd.sgi.com	6	5:45	1.0	2	9600	1-D	MR
weissman@pianoforte.esd.sgi.com	15	16:46	0.9	3	9600	2-D	MR
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total	1974	25:54:14	1.3	702
.sp .5
.fi
The first column column shows the sort key value used (the sender's
identity here, but otherwise the destination phone number,
remote \s-1CSI\s+1, etc.).
The
.I Pages
column is the total number of good pages transmitted.
The
.I time
column shows the total amount of time spent transmitting.
The
.I Pg/min
column displays the average transfer rate.
The
.I Errs
column indicates how many errors were encountered while
transmitting facsimile (note that this statistic can be
misleading because it includes, for example, problems
placing a call).
The
.I TypRate
column displays the most common communication speed with which
facsimile were transmitted.
The
.I TypData
column shows the most common data format in which facsimile
data were transmitted.
.SH FILES
.nf
.ta \w'${SPOOL}    'u
${SPOOL}	spooling area
etc/xferlog	default file from which to read statistics
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR faxd (1M),
.IR recvstats (1M),
.IR log (4F)
