.\"	BSDI	$Id: hosts.equiv.5,v 1.1 1994/01/04 16:30:26 polk Exp $
.\"
.Dd January 3, 1994
.Dt HOSTS.EQUIV 5
.Sh NAME
.Nm hosts.equiv ,
.Nm .rhosts
.Nd files listing trusted remote hosts and users
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm hosts.equiv
and 
.Nm .rhosts
files list authorized hosts and users for the 
.Xr rsh 1 ,
.Xr rcp 1 ,
and 
.Xr rlogin 1
commands and the 
.Xr rcmd 3
library routine.  All of these use the 
.Xr ruserok 3
library routine to perform ``authentication.''  The files specify 
remote hosts and users that are 
.Em trusted 
(i.e., which may bypass the standard password authentication mechanism).
Care should be taken when setting up these files to maintain 
system security!
.Pp
The
.Nm hosts.equiv
file is searched first, followed by the 
.Nm .rhosts
file in desired user's home directory.  The format for entries is:
.D1 Ar hostname Op Ar username
.Pp
In the 
.Nm hosts.equiv
file, an entry of the form:
.D1 Ar hostname
indicates that users from the specified host may access the 
local host with the same login name used on the remote host.
Entries of the form:
.D1 Ar hostname Ar username
in the 
.Nm hosts.equiv
file indicate that the specified user on the specified remote host
may access the local host as any user.
.Pp
In 
.Nm .rhosts
files, entries of the form:
.D1 Ar hostname
indicate that the user on the specified host with the 
username corresponding to the local user can access the local host.  
Entries of the form:
.D1 Ar hostname Ar username
indicate that the specified user on the remote host can access
the local host as this user (with a different user name).
.Pp
The 
.Xr ruserok 3
routine requires the authentication files be writable
only by the user being authenticated or root.  If 
the files are writable by other users or groups, authentication 
will fail.
.Pp
The 
.Nm hosts.equiv
file is not used to authenticate root access; only the 
.Nm .rhosts
file in root's home directory is used for root.  Login 
access for root also requires that the incoming tty be ``secure'' (see 
.Xr ttys 5 ).
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/hosts.equiv -compact
.It Pa /etc/hosts.equiv
The
.Nm hosts.equiv
file resides in
.Pa /etc .
.It Pa $HOME/.rhosts
User specific access file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ruserok 3 ,
.Xr rcmd 3 ,
.Xr rcp 1 ,
.Xr rsh 1 ,
.Xr rlogin 1
