'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1993 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" All rights reserved.
'\"
'\" Permission is hereby granted, without written agreement and without
'\" license or royalty fees, to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose, provided that the above copyright
'\" notice and the following two paragraphs appear in all copies.
'\"
'\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA BE LIABLE TO ANY PARTY
'\" FOR DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
'\" ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THIS DOCUMENTATION, EVEN IF THE UNIVERSITY OF
'\" CALIFORNIA HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
'\"
'\" THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS ANY WARRANTIES,
'\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
'\" AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS
'\" ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, AND THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA HAS NO OBLIGATION TO
'\" PROVIDE MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT, UPDATES, ENHANCEMENTS, OR MODIFICATIONS.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/tcl/doc/array.1,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/03 23:14:55 polk Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.\" The definitions below are for supplemental macros used in Tcl/Tk
.\" manual entries.
.\"
.\" .HS name section [date [version]]
.\"	Replacement for .TH in other man pages.  See below for valid
.\"	section names.
.\"
.\" .AP type name in/out [indent]
.\"	Start paragraph describing an argument to a library procedure.
.\"	type is type of argument (int, etc.), in/out is either "in", "out",
.\"	or "in/out" to describe whether procedure reads or modifies arg,
.\"	and indent is equivalent to second arg of .IP (shouldn't ever be
.\"	needed;  use .AS below instead)
.\"
.\" .AS [type [name]]
.\"	Give maximum sizes of arguments for setting tab stops.  Type and
.\"	name are examples of largest possible arguments that will be passed
.\"	to .AP later.  If args are omitted, default tab stops are used.
.\"
.\" .BS
.\"	Start box enclosure.  From here until next .BE, everything will be
.\"	enclosed in one large box.
.\"
.\" .BE
.\"	End of box enclosure.
.\"
.\" .VS
.\"	Begin vertical sidebar, for use in marking newly-changed parts
.\"	of man pages.
.\"
.\" .VE
.\"	End of vertical sidebar.
.\"
.\" .DS
.\"	Begin an indented unfilled display.
.\"
.\" .DE
.\"	End of indented unfilled display.
.\"
'\"	# Heading for Tcl/Tk man pages
.de HS
.ds ^3 \\0
.if !"\\$3"" .ds ^3 \\$3
.if '\\$2'cmds'       .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'lib'        .TH \\$1 3 \\*(^3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'tcl'        .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tcl "Tcl Built-In Commands"
.if '\\$2'tk'         .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tk "Tk Commands"
.if '\\$2'tclc'        .TH \\$1 3 \\*(^3 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.if '\\$2'tkc'         .TH \\$1 3 \\*(^3 Tk "Tk Library Procedures"
.if '\\$2'tclcmds'         .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tk "Tcl Applications"
.if '\\$2'tkcmds'         .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tk "Tk Applications"
.if t .wh -1.3i ^B
.nr ^l \\n(.l
.ad b
..
'\"	# Start an argument description
.de AP
.ie !"\\$4"" .TP \\$4
.el \{\
.   ie !"\\$2"" .TP \\n()Cu
.   el          .TP 15
.\}
.ie !"\\$3"" \{\
.ta \\n()Au \\n()Bu
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP	(\\$3)
.\".b
.\}
.el \{\
.br
.ie !"\\$2"" \{\
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP
.\}
.el \{\
\&\\fI\\$1\\fP
.\}
.\}
..
'\"	# define tabbing values for .AP
.de AS
.nr )A 10n
.if !"\\$1"" .nr )A \\w'\\$1'u+3n
.nr )B \\n()Au+15n
.\"
.if !"\\$2"" .nr )B \\w'\\$2'u+\\n()Au+3n
.nr )C \\n()Bu+\\w'(in/out)'u+2n
..
'\"	# BS - start boxed text
'\"	# ^y = starting y location
'\"	# ^b = 1
.de BS
.br
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 1u
.if n .nf
.if n .ti 0
.if n \l'\\n(.lu\(ul'
.if n .fi
..
'\"	# BE - end boxed text (draw box now)
.de BE
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
.ie n \l'\\n(^lu\(ul'
.el \{\
.\"	Draw four-sided box normally, but don't draw top of
.\"	box if the box started on an earlier page.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \{\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.el \}\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.\}
.fi
.br
.nr ^b 0
..
'\"	# VS - start vertical sidebar
'\"	# ^Y = starting y location
'\"	# ^v = 1 (for troff;  for nroff this doesn't matter)
.de VS
.mk ^Y
.ie n 'mc \s12\(br\s0
.el .nr ^v 1u
..
'\"	# VE - end of vertical sidebar
.de VE
.ie n 'mc
.el \{\
.ev 2
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\L'|\\n(^Yu-1v\(bv'\v'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu'\h'-|\\n(^lu+3n'
.sp -1
.fi
.ev
.\}
.nr ^v 0
..
'\"	# Special macro to handle page bottom:  finish off current
'\"	# box/sidebar if in box/sidebar mode, then invoked standard
'\"	# page bottom macro.
.de ^B
.ev 2
'ti 0
'nf
.mk ^t
.if \\n(^b \{\
.\"	Draw three-sided box if this is the box's first page,
.\"	draw two sides but no top otherwise.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.el \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.nr ^x \\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu
\kx\h'-\\nxu'\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\ky\L'-\\n(^xu'\v'\\n(^xu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.bp
'fi
.ev
.if \\n(^b \{\
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 2
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.mk ^Y
.\}
..
'\"	# DS - begin display
.de DS
.RS
.nf
.sp
..
'\"	# DE - end display
.de DE
.fi
.RE
.sp .5
..
.HS array tcl
.BS
'\" Note:  do not modify the .SH NAME line immediately below!
.SH NAME
array \- Manipulate array variables
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBarray \fIoption arrayName\fR ?\fIarg arg ...\fR?
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This command performs one of several operations on the
variable given by \fIarrayName\fR.
\fIArrayName\fR must be the name of an existing array variable.
The \fIoption\fR argument determines what action is carried
out by the command.
The legal \fIoptions\fR (which may be abbreviated) are:
.TP
\fBarray anymore \fIarrayName searchId\fR
Returns 1 if there are any more elements left to be processed
in an array search, 0 if all elements have already been
returned.
\fISearchId\fR indicates which search on \fIarrayName\fR to
check, and must have been the return value from a previous
invocation of \fBarray startsearch\fR.
This option is particularly useful if an array has an element
with an empty name, since the return value from
\fBarray nextelement\fR won't indicate whether the search
has been completed.
.TP
\fBarray donesearch \fIarrayName searchId\fR
This command terminates an array search and destroys all the
state associated with that search.  \fISearchId\fR indicates
which search on \fIarrayName\fR to destroy, and must have
been the return value from a previous invocation of
\fBarray startsearch\fR.  Returns an empty string.
.TP
\fBarray names \fIarrayName\fR
Returns a list containing the names of all of the elements in
the array.
If there are no elements in the array then an empty string is
returned.
.TP
\fBarray nextelement \fIarrayName searchId\fR
Returns the name of the next element in \fIarrayName\fR, or
an empty string if all elements of \fIarrayName\fR have
already been returned in this search.  The \fIsearchId\fR
argument identifies the search, and must have
been the return value of an \fBarray startsearch\fR command.
Warning:  if elements are added to or deleted from the array,
then all searches are automatically terminated just as if
\fBarray donesearch\fR had been invoked; this will cause
\fBarray nextelement\fR operations to fail for those searches.
.TP
\fBarray size \fIarrayName\fR
Returns a decimal string giving the number of elements in the
array.
.TP
\fBarray startsearch \fIarrayName\fR
This command initializes an element-by-element search through the
array given by \fIarrayName\fR, such that invocations of the
\fBarray nextelement\fR command will return the names of the
individual elements in the array.
When the search has been completed, the \fBarray donesearch\fR
command should be invoked.
The return value is a
search identifier that must be used in \fBarray nextelement\fR
and \fBarray donesearch\fR commands; it allows multiple
searches to be underway simultaneously for the same array.

.SH KEYWORDS
array, element names, search
