'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1993 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" All rights reserved.
'\"
'\" Permission is hereby granted, without written agreement and without
'\" license or royalty fees, to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose, provided that the above copyright
'\" notice and the following two paragraphs appear in all copies.
'\"
'\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA BE LIABLE TO ANY PARTY
'\" FOR DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
'\" ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THIS DOCUMENTATION, EVEN IF THE UNIVERSITY OF
'\" CALIFORNIA HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
'\"
'\" THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS ANY WARRANTIES,
'\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
'\" AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS
'\" ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, AND THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA HAS NO OBLIGATION TO
'\" PROVIDE MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT, UPDATES, ENHANCEMENTS, OR MODIFICATIONS.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/tcl/doc/open.1,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/03 23:15:00 polk Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.\" The definitions below are for supplemental macros used in Tcl/Tk
.\" manual entries.
.\"
.\" .HS name section [date [version]]
.\"	Replacement for .TH in other man pages.  See below for valid
.\"	section names.
.\"
.\" .AP type name in/out [indent]
.\"	Start paragraph describing an argument to a library procedure.
.\"	type is type of argument (int, etc.), in/out is either "in", "out",
.\"	or "in/out" to describe whether procedure reads or modifies arg,
.\"	and indent is equivalent to second arg of .IP (shouldn't ever be
.\"	needed;  use .AS below instead)
.\"
.\" .AS [type [name]]
.\"	Give maximum sizes of arguments for setting tab stops.  Type and
.\"	name are examples of largest possible arguments that will be passed
.\"	to .AP later.  If args are omitted, default tab stops are used.
.\"
.\" .BS
.\"	Start box enclosure.  From here until next .BE, everything will be
.\"	enclosed in one large box.
.\"
.\" .BE
.\"	End of box enclosure.
.\"
.\" .VS
.\"	Begin vertical sidebar, for use in marking newly-changed parts
.\"	of man pages.
.\"
.\" .VE
.\"	End of vertical sidebar.
.\"
.\" .DS
.\"	Begin an indented unfilled display.
.\"
.\" .DE
.\"	End of indented unfilled display.
.\"
'\"	# Heading for Tcl/Tk man pages
.de HS
.ds ^3 \\0
.if !"\\$3"" .ds ^3 \\$3
.if '\\$2'cmds'       .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'lib'        .TH \\$1 3 \\*(^3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'tcl'        .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tcl "Tcl Built-In Commands"
.if '\\$2'tk'         .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tk "Tk Commands"
.if '\\$2'tclc'        .TH \\$1 3 \\*(^3 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.if '\\$2'tkc'         .TH \\$1 3 \\*(^3 Tk "Tk Library Procedures"
.if '\\$2'tclcmds'         .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tk "Tcl Applications"
.if '\\$2'tkcmds'         .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tk "Tk Applications"
.if t .wh -1.3i ^B
.nr ^l \\n(.l
.ad b
..
'\"	# Start an argument description
.de AP
.ie !"\\$4"" .TP \\$4
.el \{\
.   ie !"\\$2"" .TP \\n()Cu
.   el          .TP 15
.\}
.ie !"\\$3"" \{\
.ta \\n()Au \\n()Bu
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP	(\\$3)
.\".b
.\}
.el \{\
.br
.ie !"\\$2"" \{\
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP
.\}
.el \{\
\&\\fI\\$1\\fP
.\}
.\}
..
'\"	# define tabbing values for .AP
.de AS
.nr )A 10n
.if !"\\$1"" .nr )A \\w'\\$1'u+3n
.nr )B \\n()Au+15n
.\"
.if !"\\$2"" .nr )B \\w'\\$2'u+\\n()Au+3n
.nr )C \\n()Bu+\\w'(in/out)'u+2n
..
'\"	# BS - start boxed text
'\"	# ^y = starting y location
'\"	# ^b = 1
.de BS
.br
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 1u
.if n .nf
.if n .ti 0
.if n \l'\\n(.lu\(ul'
.if n .fi
..
'\"	# BE - end boxed text (draw box now)
.de BE
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
.ie n \l'\\n(^lu\(ul'
.el \{\
.\"	Draw four-sided box normally, but don't draw top of
.\"	box if the box started on an earlier page.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \{\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.el \}\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.\}
.fi
.br
.nr ^b 0
..
'\"	# VS - start vertical sidebar
'\"	# ^Y = starting y location
'\"	# ^v = 1 (for troff;  for nroff this doesn't matter)
.de VS
.mk ^Y
.ie n 'mc \s12\(br\s0
.el .nr ^v 1u
..
'\"	# VE - end of vertical sidebar
.de VE
.ie n 'mc
.el \{\
.ev 2
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\L'|\\n(^Yu-1v\(bv'\v'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu'\h'-|\\n(^lu+3n'
.sp -1
.fi
.ev
.\}
.nr ^v 0
..
'\"	# Special macro to handle page bottom:  finish off current
'\"	# box/sidebar if in box/sidebar mode, then invoked standard
'\"	# page bottom macro.
.de ^B
.ev 2
'ti 0
'nf
.mk ^t
.if \\n(^b \{\
.\"	Draw three-sided box if this is the box's first page,
.\"	draw two sides but no top otherwise.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.el \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.nr ^x \\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu
\kx\h'-\\nxu'\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\ky\L'-\\n(^xu'\v'\\n(^xu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.bp
'fi
.ev
.if \\n(^b \{\
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 2
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.mk ^Y
.\}
..
'\"	# DS - begin display
.de DS
.RS
.nf
.sp
..
'\"	# DE - end display
.de DE
.fi
.RE
.sp .5
..
.HS open tcl 7.0
.BS
'\" Note:  do not modify the .SH NAME line immediately below!
.SH NAME
open \- Open a file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.VS
\fBopen \fIfileName\fR ?\fIaccess\fR? ?\fIpermissions\fR?
.VE
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This command opens a file and returns an identifier
that may be used in future invocations
of commands like \fBread\fR, \fBputs\fR, and \fBclose\fR.
\fIFileName\fR gives the name of the file to open; if it starts with
a tilde then tilde substitution is performed as described for
\fBTcl_TildeSubst\fR.
If the first character of \fIfileName\fR is ``|'' then the
remaining characters of \fIfileName\fR are treated as a command
pipeline to invoke, in the same style as for \fBexec\fR.
In this case, the identifier returned by \fBopen\fR may be used
to write to the command's input pipe or read from its output pipe.
.PP
The \fIaccess\fR argument indicates the way in which the file
(or command pipeline) is to be accessed.
.VS
It may take two forms, either a string in the form that would be
passed to the \fBfopen\fR library procedure or a list of POSIX
access flags.
It defaults to ``\fBr\fR''.
In the first form \fIaccess\fR may have any of the following values:
.VE
.TP 15
\fBr\fR
Open the file for reading only; the file must already exist.
.TP 15
\fBr+\fR
Open the file for both reading and writing; the file must
already exist.
.TP 15
\fBw\fR
Open the file for writing only.  Truncate it if it exists.  If it doesn't
exist, create a new file.
.TP 15
\fBw+\fR
Open the file for reading and writing.  Truncate it if it exists.
If it doesn't exist, create a new file.
.TP 15
\fBa\fR
Open the file for writing only.  The file must already exist, and the file
is positioned so that new data is appended to the file.
.TP 15
\fBa+\fR
Open the file for reading and writing.  If the file doesn't exist,
create a new empty file.
Set the initial access position  to the end of the file.
.PP
In the second form, \fIaccess\fR consists of a list of any of the
.VS
following flags, all of which have the standard POSIX meanings.
One of the flags must be either \fBRDONLY\fR, \fBWRONLY\fR or \fBRDWR\fR.
.TP 15
\fBRDONLY\fR
Open the file for reading only.
.TP 15
\fBWRONLY\fR
Open the file for writing only.
.TP 15
\fBRDWR\fR
Open the file for both reading and writing.
.TP 15
\fBAPPEND\fR
Set the file pointer to the end of the file prior to each write.
.TP 15
\fBCREAT\fR
Create the file if it doesn't already exist (without this flag it
is an error for the file not to exist).
.TP 15
\fBEXCL\fR
If \fBCREAT\fR is specified also, an error is returned if the
file already exists.
.TP 15
\fBNOCTTY\fR
If the file is a terminal device, this flag prevents the file from
becoming the controlling terminal of the process.
.TP 15
\fBNONBLOCK\fR
Prevents the process from blocking while opening the file.
For details refer to your system documentation on the \fBopen\fR system
call's \fBO_NONBLOCK\fR flag.
.TP 15
\fBTRUNC\fR
If the file exists it is truncated to zero length.
.PP
If a new file is created as part of opening it, \fIpermissions\fR
(an integer) is used to set the permissions for the new file in
conjunction with the process's file mode creation mask.
\fIPermissions\fR defaults to 0666.
.VE
.PP
If a file is opened for both reading and writing then \fBseek\fR
must be invoked between a read and a write, or vice versa (this
restriction does not apply to command pipelines opened with \fBopen\fR).
When \fIfileName\fR specifies a command pipeline and a write-only access
is used, then standard output from the pipeline is directed to the
current standard output unless overridden by the command.
When \fIfileName\fR specifies a command pipeline and a read-only access
is used, then standard input from the pipeline is taken from the
current standard input unless overridden by the command.

.SH KEYWORDS
access mode, append, controlling terminal, create, file,
non-blocking, open, permissions, pipeline, process
