'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1993 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" All rights reserved.
'\"
'\" Permission is hereby granted, without written agreement and without
'\" license or royalty fees, to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose, provided that the above copyright
'\" notice and the following two paragraphs appear in all copies.
'\"
'\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA BE LIABLE TO ANY PARTY
'\" FOR DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
'\" ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THIS DOCUMENTATION, EVEN IF THE UNIVERSITY OF
'\" CALIFORNIA HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
'\"
'\" THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS ANY WARRANTIES,
'\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
'\" AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS
'\" ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, AND THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA HAS NO OBLIGATION TO
'\" PROVIDE MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT, UPDATES, ENHANCEMENTS, OR MODIFICATIONS.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/tcl/doc/string.1,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/03 23:15:02 polk Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.\" The definitions below are for supplemental macros used in Tcl/Tk
.\" manual entries.
.\"
.\" .HS name section [date [version]]
.\"	Replacement for .TH in other man pages.  See below for valid
.\"	section names.
.\"
.\" .AP type name in/out [indent]
.\"	Start paragraph describing an argument to a library procedure.
.\"	type is type of argument (int, etc.), in/out is either "in", "out",
.\"	or "in/out" to describe whether procedure reads or modifies arg,
.\"	and indent is equivalent to second arg of .IP (shouldn't ever be
.\"	needed;  use .AS below instead)
.\"
.\" .AS [type [name]]
.\"	Give maximum sizes of arguments for setting tab stops.  Type and
.\"	name are examples of largest possible arguments that will be passed
.\"	to .AP later.  If args are omitted, default tab stops are used.
.\"
.\" .BS
.\"	Start box enclosure.  From here until next .BE, everything will be
.\"	enclosed in one large box.
.\"
.\" .BE
.\"	End of box enclosure.
.\"
.\" .VS
.\"	Begin vertical sidebar, for use in marking newly-changed parts
.\"	of man pages.
.\"
.\" .VE
.\"	End of vertical sidebar.
.\"
.\" .DS
.\"	Begin an indented unfilled display.
.\"
.\" .DE
.\"	End of indented unfilled display.
.\"
'\"	# Heading for Tcl/Tk man pages
.de HS
.ds ^3 \\0
.if !"\\$3"" .ds ^3 \\$3
.if '\\$2'cmds'       .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'lib'        .TH \\$1 3 \\*(^3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'tcl'        .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tcl "Tcl Built-In Commands"
.if '\\$2'tk'         .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tk "Tk Commands"
.if '\\$2'tclc'        .TH \\$1 3 \\*(^3 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.if '\\$2'tkc'         .TH \\$1 3 \\*(^3 Tk "Tk Library Procedures"
.if '\\$2'tclcmds'         .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tk "Tcl Applications"
.if '\\$2'tkcmds'         .TH \\$1 1 \\*(^3 Tk "Tk Applications"
.if t .wh -1.3i ^B
.nr ^l \\n(.l
.ad b
..
'\"	# Start an argument description
.de AP
.ie !"\\$4"" .TP \\$4
.el \{\
.   ie !"\\$2"" .TP \\n()Cu
.   el          .TP 15
.\}
.ie !"\\$3"" \{\
.ta \\n()Au \\n()Bu
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP	(\\$3)
.\".b
.\}
.el \{\
.br
.ie !"\\$2"" \{\
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP
.\}
.el \{\
\&\\fI\\$1\\fP
.\}
.\}
..
'\"	# define tabbing values for .AP
.de AS
.nr )A 10n
.if !"\\$1"" .nr )A \\w'\\$1'u+3n
.nr )B \\n()Au+15n
.\"
.if !"\\$2"" .nr )B \\w'\\$2'u+\\n()Au+3n
.nr )C \\n()Bu+\\w'(in/out)'u+2n
..
'\"	# BS - start boxed text
'\"	# ^y = starting y location
'\"	# ^b = 1
.de BS
.br
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 1u
.if n .nf
.if n .ti 0
.if n \l'\\n(.lu\(ul'
.if n .fi
..
'\"	# BE - end boxed text (draw box now)
.de BE
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
.ie n \l'\\n(^lu\(ul'
.el \{\
.\"	Draw four-sided box normally, but don't draw top of
.\"	box if the box started on an earlier page.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \{\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.el \}\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.\}
.fi
.br
.nr ^b 0
..
'\"	# VS - start vertical sidebar
'\"	# ^Y = starting y location
'\"	# ^v = 1 (for troff;  for nroff this doesn't matter)
.de VS
.mk ^Y
.ie n 'mc \s12\(br\s0
.el .nr ^v 1u
..
'\"	# VE - end of vertical sidebar
.de VE
.ie n 'mc
.el \{\
.ev 2
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\L'|\\n(^Yu-1v\(bv'\v'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu'\h'-|\\n(^lu+3n'
.sp -1
.fi
.ev
.\}
.nr ^v 0
..
'\"	# Special macro to handle page bottom:  finish off current
'\"	# box/sidebar if in box/sidebar mode, then invoked standard
'\"	# page bottom macro.
.de ^B
.ev 2
'ti 0
'nf
.mk ^t
.if \\n(^b \{\
.\"	Draw three-sided box if this is the box's first page,
.\"	draw two sides but no top otherwise.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.el \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.nr ^x \\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu
\kx\h'-\\nxu'\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\ky\L'-\\n(^xu'\v'\\n(^xu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.bp
'fi
.ev
.if \\n(^b \{\
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 2
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.mk ^Y
.\}
..
'\"	# DS - begin display
.de DS
.RS
.nf
.sp
..
'\"	# DE - end display
.de DE
.fi
.RE
.sp .5
..
.HS string tcl
.BS
'\" Note:  do not modify the .SH NAME line immediately below!
.SH NAME
string \- Manipulate strings
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBstring \fIoption arg \fR?\fIarg ...?\fR
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Performs one of several string operations, depending on \fIoption\fR.
The legal \fIoption\fRs (which may be abbreviated) are:
.TP
\fBstring compare \fIstring1 string2\fR
Perform a character-by-character comparison of strings \fIstring1\fR and
\fIstring2\fR in the same way as the C \fBstrcmp\fR procedure.  Return
\-1, 0, or 1, depending on whether \fIstring1\fR is lexicographically
less than, equal to, or greater than \fIstring2\fR.
.TP
\fBstring first \fIstring1 string2\fR
Search \fIstring2\fR for a sequence of characters that exactly match
the characters in \fIstring1\fR.  If found, return the index of the
first character in the first such match within \fIstring2\fR.  If not
found, return \-1.
.TP
\fBstring index \fIstring charIndex\fR
Returns the \fIcharIndex\fR'th character of the \fIstring\fR
argument.  A \fIcharIndex\fR of 0 corresponds to the first
character of the string.
If \fIcharIndex\fR is less than 0 or greater than
or equal to the length of the string then an empty string is
returned.
.TP
\fBstring last \fIstring1 string2\fR
Search \fIstring2\fR for a sequence of characters that exactly match
the characters in \fIstring1\fR.  If found, return the index of the
first character in the last such match within \fIstring2\fR.  If there
is no match, then return \-1.
.TP
\fBstring length \fIstring\fR
Returns a decimal string giving the number of characters in \fIstring\fR.
.TP
\fBstring match \fIpattern\fR \fIstring\fR
See if \fIpattern\fR matches \fIstring\fR; return 1 if it does, 0
if it doesn't.  Matching is done in a fashion similar to that
used by the C-shell.  For the two strings to match, their contents
must be identical except that the following special sequences
may appear in \fIpattern\fR:
.RS
.IP \fB*\fR 10
Matches any sequence of characters in \fIstring\fR,
including a null string.
.IP \fB?\fR 10
Matches any single character in \fIstring\fR.
.IP \fB[\fIchars\fB]\fR 10
Matches any character in the set given by \fIchars\fR.  If a sequence
of the form
\fIx\fB\-\fIy\fR appears in \fIchars\fR, then any character
between \fIx\fR and \fIy\fR, inclusive, will match.
.IP \fB\e\fIx\fR 10
Matches the single character \fIx\fR.  This provides a way of
avoiding the special interpretation of the characters
\fB*?[]\e\fR in \fIpattern\fR.
.RE
.TP
\fBstring range \fIstring first last\fR
Returns a range of consecutive characters from \fIstring\fR, starting
with the character whose index is \fIfirst\fR and ending with the
character whose index is \fIlast\fR.  An index of 0 refers to the
first character of the string.  \fILast\fR may be \fBend\fR (or any
abbreviation of it) to refer to the last character of the string.
If \fIfirst\fR is less than zero then it is treated as if it were zero, and
if \fIlast\fR is greater than or equal to the length of the string then
it is treated as if it were \fBend\fR.  If \fIfirst\fR is greater than
\fIlast\fR then an empty string is returned.
.TP
\fBstring tolower \fIstring\fR
Returns a value equal to \fIstring\fR except that all upper case
letters have been converted to lower case.
.TP
\fBstring toupper \fIstring\fR
Returns a value equal to \fIstring\fR except that all lower case
letters have been converted to upper case.
.TP
\fBstring trim \fIstring\fR ?\fIchars\fR?
Returns a value equal to \fIstring\fR except that any leading
or trailing characters from the set given by \fIchars\fR are
removed.
If \fIchars\fR is not specified then white space is removed
(spaces, tabs, newlines, and carriage returns).
.TP
\fBstring trimleft \fIstring\fR ?\fIchars\fR?
Returns a value equal to \fIstring\fR except that any
leading characters from the set given by \fIchars\fR are
removed.
If \fIchars\fR is not specified then white space is removed
(spaces, tabs, newlines, and carriage returns).
.TP
\fBstring trimright \fIstring\fR ?\fIchars\fR?
Returns a value equal to \fIstring\fR except that any
trailing characters from the set given by \fIchars\fR are
removed.
If \fIchars\fR is not specified then white space is removed
(spaces, tabs, newlines, and carriage returns).

.SH KEYWORDS
case conversion, compare, index, match, pattern, string
