You will need to edit the Makefile. The comments should make it clear
what needs changing. Do a make; then do a make install as root.

You need to decide what baud rate you are going to use. If you have a
very old Laserwriter (not a plus), you will have to use 9600;
otherwise you should be able to use 38400.

You need to add an entry in /etc/printcap.  Here's the entry I use:

lp|ps:\
	:br#38400:lp=/dev/ttya:mx#0:sf:sh:rw:sb:\
	:fc#0177777:fs#003:ms=-isig,igncr,cstopb,-echok:\
	:af=/usr/adm/psacct:lf=/usr/adm/pslog:sd=/usr/spool/pslpd:\
	:if=/usr/local/lib/psif:

This entry would be appropriate if you were using /dev/ttya and a baud
rate of 38400.  Note that the `sf', `rw' and `sb' capabilities are
essential.  You need to create the spool directory (/usr/spool/pslpd),
the accounting file (/usr/adm/psacct), and the log file
(/usr/adm/pslog).  The spool directory and the accounting file should
be owned by daemon, the log file by root. You can use other names if
you want.  The `ms' capabability is a Sun extension.  If you decide to
make use of the patches in lpr.diff, you should also add the `ex'
boolean capability (the patches also add the `ms' capability.)

If you wish to have banner printing, then you should add
`of=/usr/local/lib/psof', and remove the `sh' capability.  You will
probably also wnat to modify the banner printing code in banner.ps.
As distributed, it provides a fairly minimalist banner page.  Note
that psof requires the `sb' capability.  If your printer stacks face
up and you're using the 4.3BSD (or later) lpd, then you can add an
`hl' capability to specify that the banner page should be printed at
the end of a job instead of at the beginning.

You can add easily add other filters. For example, suppose you want to
add a filter for dvi files. Then add an entry to /etc/printcap:

  :df=/usr/local/lib/psdf:

Then create a shell script /usr/local/lib/psdf

#!/bin/sh
/usr/local/bin/dvitops | /usr/local/lib/lprps "$@"

Replace `/usr/local/bin/dvitops' by the name of your favourite dvi to
ps program (it must be able to read from the standard input). Then you
can print dvi files with `lpr -d'.

You must also set the printer's communication parameters. Make sure
you have an entry like this in /etc/remote:

  ttya:dv=/dev/ttya:br#1200:el=^D:

Set the switch on your printer to position labelled 1200 or 0. Then 

  tip ttya

(*)Now carefully type

  executive

and then RETURN. The printer will not echo this while you are typing.
If you typed it correctly, the printer will print a banner and a
prompt.  If you get an error message from the printer, type CTRL-D and
try again.  If you don't get any response at all, you probably have a
cable problem. Then type

  serverdict begin 0 exitserver

and RETURN. The printer should say something like

  %%[ exitserver: permanent state may be changed ]%%

Then type

  statusdict begin 25 38400 3 setsccbatch end

and RETURN. The printer will not echo this. If you get an error message,
type CTRL-D and go back to (*). Otherwise type CTRL-D.

Now check to see that this worked. Type

  executive 

again. Then

  statusdict begin 25 sccbatch end = = 

The printer should say

  3
  38400

If it does, type CTRL-D, exit tip, and set the switch on the printer
back to the position labelled 9600 or 1.  If not, type CTRL-D and try
again from (*).

$Id: INSTALL,v 1.2 1994/01/13 17:53:23 sanders Exp $
