.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1993 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: aha.4,v 1.3 1993/03/23 22:56:17 polk Exp $
.Dd March 23, 1993
.Os
.Dt AHA 4 i386
.Sh NAME
.Nm aha
.Nd Adaptec AHA-1540B/AHA-1542B SCSI host adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "controller aha0 at isa0 port 0x330"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm aha
driver is a software interface to
the Adaptec AHA-1540B and AHA-1542B ISA host adapters
for the Small Computer Systems Interface (X3.131-1992) bus.
The Adaptec cards provide automatic SCSI protocol handling,
in which the user just sends a SCSI Command Descriptor Block and the
SCSI protocol state is managed on-board.
They provide parallel operations, using a
.Sq mailbox
protocol which allows the host to send
several operations that the board will schedule automatically.
The cards also support
bus master DMA, a form of ISA DMA which
has low software overhead and
is used for scanning command blocks and mailboxes
as well as reading and writing buffers.
For convenient operation in the ISA DMA environment,
the Adaptec firmware offers
scatter/gather mapping, a technique for handling
transfers out of virtual memory that
works by providing the card with
a map of the physical addresses in a virtual region.
The card supports only 24-bit physical addresses,
but the driver will copy pages outside this range
into buffers with low addresses if necessary.
Two SCSI features supported in firmware are
automatic synchronous SCSI protocol negotiation,
which can identify SCSI peripherals that support high-speed
operation and match transfer speeds,
and automatic connect/disconnect bus control,
which allows the host adapter to disconnect
from long-running operations such as seeks or rewinds
and to connect to other operations on other targets
while waiting for the original operation to reconnect.
The AHA-1542B differs from the AHA-1540B in
providing an on-board floppy controller
which is handled using a standard floppy interface
(see
.Xr floppy 4 ) .
The EISA AHA-1742A card can be handled in
.Sq standard
(AHA-1542B compatible) mode using this driver,
although it is more effective to use
.Sq enhanced
mode instead;
see
.Xr eaha 4 .
.Pp
The
.Nm aha
driver is designed to be used as a machine-dependent back end
for machine-independent SCSI pseudo-devices
(see
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr st 4 ) .
It handles parallelism across targets using
extended Command Control Blocks;
each
.Va soft_ccb
contains an Adaptec Command Control Block
plus information on scatter/gather map use
and hooks for upcalls on interrupt.
The driver handles polled and interrupting SCSI commands,
for use during autoconfiguration and multi-user operation.
It allocates and manages a pool of these
.Va soft_ccb
structures at known physical addresses so that
physical DMA is simple and convenient.
.Pp
Booting from a SCSI disk attached to an Adaptec host adapter
requires boot code with knowledge of the host adapter.
A SCSI disk boot block named
.Pa ahaboot
and a 14-sector boot named
.Pa bootaha
must be installed using
.Xr disklabel 8
on a SCSI disk in order to boot from the Adaptec interface.
The Adaptec card simulates the BIOS interface
for a standard PC hard disk for the purpose of booting,
and the CMOS setup memory must indicate that
the primary hard disk is
.Sq "Not Installed"
in order for the Adaptec card
to override the normal hard disk boot.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/bootstraps/ahaboot -compact
.It Pa /dev/sd[0-6][a-h]
SCSI disk pseudo-devices
.It Pa /dev/rst[0-3]
SCSI tape pseudo-devices
.It Pa /usr/bootstraps/ahaboot
boot block
.It Pa /usr/bootstraps/bootaha
14-sector boot
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr st 4
.Sh HISTORY
Written by Donn Seeley of BSDI for BSD/386 0.3.
.Sh BUGS
The AHA-1540A isn't supported yet.
.Pp
The buffer
.Sq bounce
hack for machines with more than 16 megabytes of memory
can be slow.
.Pp
The driver determines the IRQ and DRQ by reading them from the board with a
.Sq config data
command,
but the board uses separate jumpers to set the real IRQ and DRQ
and to set the values returned by the
.Sq config data
command.
If these jumpers disagree, severe confusion will result.
.Pp
The default bus transfer speed is sometimes too high for certain SCSI devices.
If trouble occurs, try lowering it with the appropriate jumpers.
.Pp
Floppy drives usually have tiny buffers
and can get data late errors if the Adaptec card uses the built-in
11-microsecond value for DMA burst length (bus on time).
The driver programs the card to run more slowly to avoid this problem,
but the value of
.Va aha_bus_on_time
can be increased if your floppies don't have this problem.
