.\"	BSDI $Id: bms.4,v 1.1 1993/03/23 05:11:01 polk Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)bms.4	1.0 (Berkeley) 3/21/93
.\"
.Dd March 21, 1993
.Dt BMS 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bms
.Nd Microsoft Bus Mouse driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device bms0 at isa? port 0x23c irq 5
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The bms driver supports Microsoft (and compatible) Bus Mouse interface cards.
Sometimes they are also called InPort mouse cards.
Each interface card occupies a block of 4 i/o ports.
Normally, the primary InPort i/o port address of 0x23c is used.
Most mouse interface cards can also be
jumpered to use the secondary port address of 0x238.
.Pp
The hardware interrupt level is not determined automatically during
autoconfiguration so it is very important to specify the proper IRQ
line that the card is jumpered to use.
This interface cannot share
the interrupt line with any other device, so each bus mouse interface
card must be assigned a unique interrupt request line.
Microsoft bus mouse cards support IRQ 2, 3, 4 or 5.
.Pp
This driver is known to work with the ATI Graphics Ultra card
which contains an InPort compatible mouse interface.
This port
must be specifically enabled using the ATI DOS setup program
for this card before it can be used by BSD/386.
.Sh FILES
.Pa /dev/mouse
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm bms
driver was written by Erik Forsberg in 1992 and has been contributed
to the Berkeley BSD system.
Autoconfiguration was added by BSDI.
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm bms
driver does not work for the built-in mouse interface on the
ATI Graphics Ultra Pro cards.
