.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	$Id: com.4,v 1.6 1994/01/31 08:41:39 donn Exp $
.Dd January 30, 1994
.Dt COM 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm com
.Nd 8051/16440/16550 serial port driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device com0 at isa? port 0x3f8 [flags val]"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The COM driver supports standard PC compatible serial ports
and some simple serial multiport cards.
Each serial port uses a block of 8 I/O ports which
must be aligned on an 8 port boundary.
The standard serial ports
(com0 through com3, generally known in hardware documentation as
COM1 through COM4)
are often provided by cards with 2 serial ports and possibly other devices.
Multiport cards generally provide 4 or more serial ports,
which can be configured in ways other than the standard COM1 through COM4
configurations.
Some multiport cards can be jumpered to provide standard COM1-4 ports
and/or a group of ports that share an interrupt.
With such cards, the standard ports should be configured as described here,
and the remaining ports should be configured as shown for multiport cards.
.Pp
Each standard com device (com0 through com3)
and each multiport card should have its own interrupt.
The hardware interrupt
level is detected during autoconfiguration, or it may be specified
in the configuration file.  The FIFO on 16550 UARTs
is enabled automatically.
.Pp
The standard com ports (com0 through com3, aka COM1 through COM4),
can be configured as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
device com0 at isa? port 0x3f8
device com1 at isa? port 0x3e8
device com2 at isa? port 0x2f8
device com3 at isa? port 0x2e8
.Ed
.Pp
Each of these ports must have a separate irq, which is automatically
detected in these examples.
Note that the conventional irq for com2 is the same as for com2,
similarly for com3 and com1, and thus different values must be used.
.Pp
The flags parameter in the configuration entries is used to set up
the shared irq mechanism for ports on a multiport card.
The flags value is
composed of three fields: the interrupt indicator port (bits 0x3ff),
the group number (bits 0xf000), and the sub-unit number (bits
0xf0000).
The devices with the same group number and interrupt indicator
share the interrupt determined by sub-unit 0 of the group.
The unit with sub-unit 0 must be listed first in the configuration file.
.Pp
For AST-compatible cards,
the interrupt indicator bits should be set to the I/O address of the
interrupt indicator register of the serial card.  Some multiplexor
cards do not have an interrupt indicator register.  For such cards,
set this field to 0.
.Pp
The group number is used to show which serial ports share an
interrupt.  It should be 0 for all ports on the first multiplexor
card, 1 for the all ports on the second, etc.
.Pp
The sub-unit number is used to identify the different serial ports on
a single multiport card.  It should be 0 for the first port, 1 for the second,
etc.
.Pp
For example, to configure two AST-compatible 4-port cards,
use the following device lines:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
device com4 at isa? port 0x2a0 flags 0x002bf
device com5 at isa? port 0x2a8 flags 0x102bf
device com6 at isa? port 0x2b0 flags 0x202bf
device com7 at isa? port 0x2b8 flags 0x302bf

device com8 at isa? port 0x1a0 flags 0x011bf
device com9 at isa? port 0x1a8 flags 0x111bf
device com10 at isa? port 0x1b0 flags 0x211bf
device com11 at isa? port 0x1b8 flags 0x311bf

.Ed
Also, make sure the two cards are jumpered for different interrupts.
.Pp
A similar scheme is used with the USENET II serial cards and other cards
that do not use the interrupt indicator port to enable shared interrupts.
For these cards the interrupt indicator port is set to 0, and the group
number must be non-zero.
Devices with the same group number share an interrupt.
For example, use the following device lines
to configure a Boca Research BB1008, which does not have an interrupt
identification register.
The first 4 lines could also be used for a USENET II 4-port card,
omitting the irq value for automatic interrupt configuration.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
device com4 at isa? port 0x100 irq 4 flags 0x01000
device com5 at isa? port 0x108 irq 4 flags 0x11000
device com6 at isa? port 0x110 irq 4 flags 0x21000
device com7 at isa? port 0x118 irq 4 flags 0x31000
device com8 at isa? port 0x120 irq 4 flags 0x41000
device com9 at isa? port 0x128 irq 4 flags 0x51000
device com10 at isa? port 0x130 irq 4 flags 0x61000
device com11 at isa? port 0x138 irq 4 flags 0x71000
.Ed
.Pp
Automatic irq discovery does not work for Boca Research cards,
and the irq must be included in the configuration file.  Also,
shared irq mode for multiple boards is not supported;
i.e. each Boca Research and compatible multiplexor should have a different irq.
.Pp
For other hardware, the flags should be omitted or set to 0.
.Pp
The use of the same interrupt by different ports at different times
is not currently supported.
However, the experimental option
.Bd -literal -offset indent
options COM_SHARE_IRQ
.Ed
.Pp
in the kernel configuration file causes the interrupt line to be disabled
when a port is closed, potentially allowing different standard ports
(com0 through com3) to share an interrupt.
.Pp
The speed may be set to anything up to 38400 bits per second, plus
57600 and 115200 (you must use
.Xr termios 4 ,
rather than the old style ioctl interface to use non-traditional
speeds).
.Pp
An open on the com driver will block until carrier is present, unless
O_NONBLOCK or CLOCAL is set.
.Pp
Hardware flow control via RTS and CTS may be enabled using the
CRTS_IFLOW and CCTS_OFLOW flags in the c_cflag field in the termios
structure.
.Sh FILES
.Pa /dev/tty00 ,
.Pa /dev/tty01 ,
etc.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm com
driver first appeared in Berkeley Networking-2.  Multiport card support
was added by BSDI.
