.\" Copyright (c) 1993,1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: cons.4,v 1.2 1994/01/14 07:19:19 donn Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer
.\" Science Department.
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)cons.4	5.2 (Berkeley) 3/27/91
.\"
.Dd January 14, 1994
.Dt CONS 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cons
.Nd virtual console interface
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The system supports a
.Dq virtual
console device used for
kernel and system error
messages which is accessed in user mode via
.Pa /dev/console .
It is virtual in the sense that it is attached to a specific hardware interface
at boot time.
It then becomes an alternate access path to the selected device.
Thus, the virtual console device
.Pa /dev/console
should be used for logins, etc.,
only when the specific device file is not also in use.
.Pp
The currently supported console devices
are a standard PC keyboard and display card (see
.Xr pccons 4
for information about the uses of this device, which is also known as
.Pa /dev/conskbd0 ) ,
and a standard COM serial port
(see
.Xr com 4 ) .
The default console is a PC keyboard and display.
The use of a serial console is enabled by the kernel option
.Li COMCONSOLE="N"
where
.Li N
is the console unit number.
If the unit number is not 0 and/or the port is not at the standard
address for com0 (0x3f8), the option
.Li COMCNADDR="0xNNN"
must also be specified with the correct port address for the desired
console port.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/console
.It Pa /dev/console
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr com 4 ,
.Xr pccons 4 ,
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr boot 8 ,
.Xr syslog 8
