.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1993,1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	BSDI $Id: digi.4,v 1.1 1994/01/15 23:32:27 donn Exp $
.Dd January 14, 1994
.Os BSD 4
.Dt DIGI 4 i386
.Sh NAME
.Nm digi
\(en driver for DigiBoard PC/Xe serial controllers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device digi0 at isa? port 0x220 iomem 0xd0000 iosiz 65536 flags 0x0001"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The driver supports the PC/4e, PC/8e, and PC/16e intelligent serial
controllers.
It also supports the PC/8i controller when set to use 64K of memory.
.Sh HARDWARE CONFIGURATION
The i/o address, memory address, and irq need to be set with the
dip switches on the board.
The single i/o address can be one of 0x100, 0x110, 0x120, 0x200,
0x220, 0x300, or 0x320.
The memory address is a 64k block of memory in the 640k to 1meg
range, this block must be aligned on a 64k boundary but can be
any block that is not in use by some other device or the system ROM.  
The interupt (irq) can be one of 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12, or 15.
.Sh SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION
The driver needs to be told what i/o port and what memory address the
controller has been set to, this is done with the port, iomem, and
iosize keywords in the config file.  The driver supports switching
the functions of the DSR and DCD lines.  This is done so that users
with RJ45 conectors can use an 8 conductor cable and not loose any
"real" functionality.  This is enabled by adding a "flags 0x0001"
statement to the config line for the device.
.Sh IOCTLS
Unless specified otherwise the argument to the DigiBoard specific ioctls
is a pointer to an int.  When issuing an ioctl that targets the controller
rather than a specific line any line can be opened for the file descriptor.
DigiBoard specific ioctls that set something should only be called as root,
they do check.
.Bl -tag -width "DIOCSALTPIN"
.It Dv DIOCNLINES
Gets the number of lines on the controller.
.It Dv DIOCGFLAGS
Gets the configuration flags for the controller.
.It Dv DIOCSFLAGS
Sets the configuration flags for the controller.  Currently this is of
no use but may be in the future.
.It Dv DIOCGIFREQ
Gets the interrupt frequency of the driver in 10 mS increments.
.It Dv DIOCSIFREQ
Sets the interrupt frequency of the driver in 10 ms increments,
valid range is 1 to 50.
.It Dv DIOCGLOWAT
Gets the output low water mark of the driver.  Not yet implemented.
.It Dv DIOCSLOWAT
Sets the output low water mark of the driver.  Not yet implemented.
.It Dv DIOCVERB
Sets the verbosity level of the driver.  This is usualy disabled at
compile time.
.It Dv DIOCGALTPIN
Get state of DSR-DCD swaping, 0 indicates not swapped, 1 indicates swapped,
and 2 indicates an unknown state, 2 should never happen.  Unlike the flag
in the config file which sets the state of all lines on a board this
function sets a single line.
.It Dv DIOCSALTPIN
Set state of DSR-DCD swapping, 0 maps DSR to DSR and DCD to DCD, 1 sets
DSR to DCD and DCD to DSR.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/usr/include/machine/digi.h"
.It Dv /dev/tty1[0-9a-f]
Device files through which board is accessed.
.It Dv /usr/include/machine/digi.h
#defines needed to access the DigiBoard specific ioctls.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The messages issued by the driver are meant to be self explanatory.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr MAKEDEV 8 ,
.Xr digiconfig 8 ,
.Xr tty 4
.Sh AUTHOR
Michael Galassi (nerd@percy.rain.com)
.Sh BUGS
All DigiBoards in the system should share a single 64k memory address,
this is not yet implemented.
.Pp
If the system were to crash while the memory on the DigiBoard is
enabled a hard reset may be needed to get things going again if
the DigiBoard shares a 128k range with an 8 bit device such as
a vga or motherboard ROM BIOS.  This is currently always the case
as the code to disable memory when not in use is not yet in place.
.Pp
This code has not been tested on a PC/Xi board other than PC/8i though it is
believed to work when the board is set to use only 64K of RAM.
