.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1993 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	BSDI $Id: eaha.4,v 1.2 1993/03/23 22:56:21 polk Exp $
.\"
.Dd March 23, 1993
.Dt EAHA 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm eaha
.Nd Adaptec 1740A/1742A EISA SCSI host adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "controller	eaha0 at isa?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm eaha
driver is a software interface to the Adaptec AHA-1740, AHA-1740A
and AHA-1742A host adapters
for the Small Computer Systems Interface (X3.131-1992) bus.
The driver assumes that the card has been programmed for
.Sq enhanced mode
operation, which permits it to take advantage of EISA features;
in the other mode,
.Sq standard mode ,
the card behaves like an AHA-1542B
(see
.Xr aha 4 ) .
To program the card for enhanced mode operation,
you will need to run the manufacturer's
EISA Configuration Utility for your machine under DOS,
load the Adaptec configuration files (if they weren't provided
by the manufacturer),
and set all the relevant card parameters to their
enhanced mode defaults.
.Pp
The Adaptec cards provide automatic SCSI protocol handling,
in which the driver just sends a SCSI Command Descriptor Block and the
SCSI protocol state is managed on-board.
They provide parallel operations, using a
.Sq mailbox
protocol which allows the host to send
several operations that the board will schedule automatically.
The cards also support
EISA bus master DMA, using an on-board
DMA controller that takes advantage of EISA bus bandwidth
and does not use any ISA DRQ resources.
The cards can program their own IRQ;
the driver selects an available IRQ value from the set
of 9, 10, 11, 12, 14 or 15 and
programs it when the card is configured.
The Adaptec firmware offers
scatter/gather mapping, a technique for handling
transfers out of virtual memory that
works by providing the card with
a map of the physical addresses in a virtual region.
Unlike the AHA-1542B, the AHA-1742A supports full 32-bit physical addresses.
Two SCSI features supported in firmware are
automatic synchronous SCSI protocol negotiation,
which can identify SCSI peripherals that support high-speed
operation and match transfer speeds,
and automatic connect/disconnect bus control,
which allows the host adapter to disconnect
from long-running operations such as seeks or rewinds
and to connect to other operations on other targets
while waiting for the original operation to reconnect.
The AHA-1742A differs from the AHA-1740A in
providing an on-board floppy controller
which is handled using a standard floppy interface
(see
.Xr floppy 4 ) .
.Pp
The
.Nm eaha
driver is designed to be used as a machine-dependent back end
for machine-independent SCSI pseudo-devices
(see
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr st 4 ) .
It handles parallelism across targets using
extended Enhanced Control Blocks;
each
.Va soft_ecb
contains an Adaptec Enhanced Control Block
plus information on scatter/gather map use
and hooks for upcalls on interrupt.
The driver handles polled and interrupting SCSI commands,
for use during autoconfiguration and multi-user operation.
It allocates and manages a pool of these
.Va soft_ecb
structures at known physical addresses so that
physical DMA is simple and convenient.
.Pp
Booting from a SCSI disk attached to an Adaptec host adapter
requires boot code with knowledge of the host adapter.
A SCSI disk boot block named
.Pa eahaboot
and a 14-sector boot named
.Pa booteaha
must be installed using
.Xr disklabel 8
on a SCSI disk in order to boot from the Adaptec interface.
The Adaptec card simulates the BIOS interface
for a standard PC hard disk for the purpose of booting.
The card uses a set of specific drive selection criteria
to choose a default boot disk;
these parameters are set using the EISA Configuration Utility.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr aha 4 ,
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr st 4
.Sh BUGS
The eaha driver should be configured as late as possible
so that it won't choose an IRQ that
some other card with a fixed IRQ needs.
.Pp
The default synchronous transfer rate can be too high for some SCSI devices.
If trouble occurs, try lowering it with the ECU.
