.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.Dd January 27, 1994
.Dt EF 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ef
.Nd
.Tn 3Com
EtherLink III (3C509, 3C509-TP, 3C509-Combo, 3c579) Ethernet interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ef0 at isa? port 0x250"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm ef
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network.
It supports the 3Com 3C509-series ISA bus cards and the 3C579
EISA card.
It uses a
block of 16 i/o ports in range 0x200 through 0x3f0.
Each card is programmed to use the address in the system configuration file.
The block must be aligned on a 16 port boundary.
The card also uses port 0x100 to configure the base port.
The hardware interrupt level (IRQ) is also programmed by the system.
The IRQ can be specified in the system configuration file,
or a free IRQ will automatically be selected during autoconfiguration.
Supported irqs are: 2(9), 3, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12, 15.
The 3C509 should be installed in a 16-bit slot.
The initialization routine
will assign sequential unit numbers to 3C509 cards according to their
Ethernet station addresses.
.Pp
The 3C509 supports software-selectable 10BASE-2/BNC and AUI/DIX interfaces.
3C509-TP has 10BASE-T (twisted pair) interface instead of AUI/DIX,
and the 3C509-Combo supports all three interfaces.
The interface flag
.Dv IFF_LINK0
selects BNC (thin Ethernet) when set
(using the
.Li link0
option to
.Xr ifconfig 8 ) .
The flag
.Dv IFF_LINK1
selects the twisted pair connection.
If neither flag is set, the AUI connector is used if it is present,
otherwise the twisted pair interface if present; otherwise the BNC
connection is used.
.Pp
Each of the host's network addresses
is specified at boot time with an
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl .
The
.Xr ef
interface employs the address resolution protocol described in
.Xr arp 4
to dynamically map between Internet and Ethernet addresses on the local
network.
.Pp
The use of ``trailer'' encapsulation to minimize copying data on
input and output is supported by the interface.
The use of trailers is negotiated with
.Tn ARP .
This negotiation may be disabled, on a per-interface basis,
by setting the
.Dv IFF_NOTRAILERS
flag with an
.Dv SIOCSIFFLAGS
.Xr ioctl .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be printed during autoconfiguration:
.Bl -diag
.It ef%d: invalid i/o base address %x
.sp
Invalid port specification in kernel config file.
.It ef%d: no irq available
.sp
Automatic interrupt selection was enabled, but all usable interrupts
had already been claimed by other devices.
.It ef%d: invalid IRQ number %d
.sp
Invalid irq specification in kernel config file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr arp 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm ef
driver first appeared in BSDI.
