.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.Dd January 14, 1994
.Dt EL 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm el
.Nd
.Tn 3Com
EtherLink 16 (3C507) Ethernet interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device el0 at isa? port 0x310 iomem 0xd0000 iosiz 65536"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm el
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network.  It uses a
software-selectable block of 16 i/o ports in range 0x200 through 0x3f0.
The block must be aligned on a 16 port boundary.
The card also uses port 0x100 to configure the base port.
The shared memory window is programmable and its base address and size should
be specified in the system configuration file.
Size of a memory window can be 16, 32, 48 or 64 kilobytes; the base address
can be 0xc0000, 0xc8000, 0xd0000 and 0xd8000 (16/32Kb windows only).
The hardware interrupt level is programmable
and is selected during autoconfiguration time or can be specified in the
system configuration file.  Supported irqs are: 2(9), 3, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12, 15.
This card should be installed in a 16-bit slot.
.Pp
3C507 supports software-selectable 10BASE-2/BNC and AUI/DIX interfaces.
The interface flag
.Dv IFF_LINK0
selects BNC (thin Ethernet) when set.
See
.Xr ifconfig 8
for details.
.Pp
Each of the host's network addresses
is specified at boot time with an
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl .
The
.Xr el
interface employs the address resolution protocol described in
.Xr arp 4
to dynamically map between Internet and Ethernet addresses on the local
network.
.Pp
The use of ``trailer'' encapsulation to minimize copying data on
input and output is supported by the interface.
The use of trailers is negotiated with
.Tn ARP .
This negotiation may be disabled, on a per-interface basis,
by setting the
.Dv IFF_NOTRAILERS
flag with an
.Dv SIOCSIFFLAGS
.Xr ioctl .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be printed during autoconfiguration:
.Bl -diag
.It el%d: illegal base port number 0x%x
.sp
Invalid port specification in kernel config file.
.It el%d: illegal RAM address/size combination (0x%x, %d)
.sp
Invalid iomem or iosize specification in kernel config file.
.It el%d: no irq available
.sp
Automatic interrupt selection was enabled, but all usable interrupts
had already been claimed by other devices.
.It el%d: unsupported IRQ number %d
.sp
Invalid irq specification in kernel config file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr arp 4
.Sh BUGS
The system supports only one
.Nm el
interface per machine.
This is a hardware limitation.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm el
driver first appeared in BSDI.
