.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.Dd October 9, 1992
.Dt EO 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm eo
.Nd
.Tn 3Com
EtherLink (3C501) Ethernet interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device eo0 at isa? port 0x320"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm eo
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network.  It uses a
jumper-selectable block of 16 i/o ports in range 0x200 through 0x3f0.  The block must be
aligned on a 16 port boundary.  The jumper-selectable hardware interrupt level is
detected at autoconfiguration time or alternatively can be specified in the
kernel configuration file.
The 3C501 supports the following irqs: 2(9), 3, 4, 5, 6, 7;
it can be installed in 8-bit or 16-bit slot.  The type of interface (10BASE-2/BNC or
AUI/DIX) is selected by the on-board jumpers.  DMA is not supported in the standard
driver, but a compile flag turns it on for use with very old 3c501s.  In this
case the DMA channel should be selected by the on-board jumpers and specified in
the system configuration file. Supported drqs are: 1, 2 and 3.
.Pp
Each of the host's network addresses
is specified at boot time with an
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl .
The
.Xr ef
interface employs the address resolution protocol described in
.Xr arp 4
to dynamically map between Internet and Ethernet addresses on the local
network.
.Pp
The use of ``trailer'' encapsulation to minimize copying data on
input and output is supported by the interface.
The use of trailers is negotiated with
.Tn ARP .
This negotiation may be disabled, on a per-interface basis,
by setting the
.Dv IFF_NOTRAILERS
flag with an
.Dv SIOCSIFFLAGS
.Xr ioctl .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be printed during autoconfiguration:
.Bl -diag
.It eo%d: invalid i/o base address %x
.sp
Invalid port specification in kernel config file.
.It eo%d: invalid IRQ number %d
.sp
Invalid irq specification in kernel config file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr arp 4
.Sh BUGS
Usage of this Ethernet interface card is
.Em not
recommended because of severe performance problems and loss of
packets when it is used to communicate with machines equipped with
faster Ethernet interfaces. This card is no longer manufactured.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm eo
driver first appeared in BSDI.
