.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.Dd October 9, 1992
.Dt EP 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ep
.Nd
.Tn 3Com
EtherLink Plus (3C505) Ethernet interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ep0 at isa? port 0x240"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm ep
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network.  It uses a
jumper-selectable block of 8 i/o ports in range 0x200 through 0x3f0.
The block must be
aligned on a 16 port boundary.  The hardware interrupt level is
detected at autoconfiguration time or alternatively can be
specified in the system configuration file.  Supported irqs are:
2(9), 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15.
DMA and shared memory are not supported and should be disabled.
The type of interface (10BASE-2/BNC or AUI/DIX) is jumper-selectable.
The 3C505 board should be installed in 16-bit slot.
.Pp
Each of the host's network addresses
is specified at boot time with an
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl .
The
.Xr ep
interface employs the address resolution protocol described in
.Xr arp 4
to dynamically map between Internet and Ethernet addresses on the local
network.
.Pp
The use of ``trailer'' encapsulation to minimize copying data on
input and output is supported by the interface.
The use of trailers is negotiated with
.Tn ARP .
This negotiation may be disabled, on a per-interface basis,
by setting the
.Dv IFF_NOTRAILERS
flag with an
.Dv SIOCSIFFLAGS
.Xr ioctl .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be printed during autoconfiguration:
.Bl -diag
.It ep%d: invalid i/o base address %x
.sp
Invalid port specification in kernel config file.
.It ep%d: invalid IRQ number %d
.sp
Invalid irq specification in kernel config file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr arp 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm ep
driver first appeared in BSDI.
