.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: ex.4,v 1.2 1994/01/14 07:19:23 donn Exp $
.\"
.Dd January 14, 1994
.Dt EX 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ex
.Nd
.Tn Intel
EtherExpress 16 Ethernet interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ex0 at isa? port 0x260"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm ex
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network.  It uses a
program-selectable block of 16 i/o ports in the range 0x200 through 0x270
or 0x300 through 0x370.
The block must be
aligned on a 16 port boundary.  The hardware interrupt level is
detected at autoconfiguration time or alternatively can be
specified in the system configuration file.  Supported IRQs are:
2(9), 3, 4, 5, 10, 11.
DMA and shared memory are not supported and should be disabled.
The type of interface (10BASE-2/BNC, AUI/DIX, or 10BASE-T/twisted pair)
is set with the manufacturer-supplied setup program.
On newer cards, the autoselect option should not be selected.
On those cards, the selected interface is printed during
autoconfiguration.
It may be possible to change the choice of interface by setting
the interface flags
.Dv IFF_LINK0
and/or
.Dv IFF_LINK1 ,
settable via the
.Li link0
and
.Li link1
options of
.Xr ifconfig 8
as follows:
.Li link0
selects BNC,
.Li link1
selects twisted pair, and
.Li link0
and
.Li link1
select AUI.
If neither flag is set, the pre-configured connector is used.
Not all combinations have been successfully tested.
.Pp
The EtherExpress board should be installed in a 16-bit slot.
To configure the board use the manufacturer-supplied program.
.Pp
Each of the host's network addresses
is specified at boot time with an
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl .
The
.Xr ex
interface employs the address resolution protocol described in
.Xr arp 4
to dynamically map between Internet and Ethernet addresses on the local
network.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be printed during autoconfiguration:
.Bl -diag
.It ex%d: invalid i/o base address %x
.br
Invalid port specification in kernel config file.
.It ex%d: no irq available
.br
Automatic interrupt level detection failed.
.It ep%d: invalid interrupt level %d
.br
Invalid IRQ specification in kernel config file.
.It ex%d: init failed (%s)
.br
Error detected during initialization \-
the most probable cause is a hardware failure.
.It ex%d: reset
.br
Lost interrupt \- the board has been reset.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr arp 4
