.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: floppy.4,v 1.2 1993/03/23 22:56:22 polk Exp $
.Dd March 23, 1993
.Dt FD 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fd
.Nd floppy disk driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "controller fdc0 at isa? port 0x3f0 drq 2"
.Cd "disk fd0 at fdc0 drive 0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This is a driver for PC standard floppy disks.  It uses a block of 8
I/O ports which must be aligned on an 8 port boundary.  The controller
also uses one 8 bit DMA channel.  The hardware interrupt level is
detected during autoconfiguration.
.Pp
The type of each drive must be specified
correctly in the non-volatile CMOS memory area,
using the BIOS
.Sq setup
feature.
The
.Sq setup
feature is normally accessed by
pressing the
.Sq DEL
or
.Sq Delete
key during memory testing at power-on time.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports low and high density 5.25 and 3.5 inch drives.  The
driver normally automatically detects the density of the media at open time.
The density may be forced to a specific value by using an alternate minor
device number.
.Pp
The encoding of the minor device number is similar to the encoding
for hard disk devices with one addition.
As with hard disks, the least-significant three bits of the minor device
number specify a partition
.Ns ( Sq a
through
.Sq h ) ,
and the next two bits specify the drive number.
The most-significant three bits of the eight-bit minor device number specify
the drive and media type.
A value of zero indicates the use of automatic density
detection, defaulting to the drive's highest density.
The density values depend both on the type of drive and the diskette
type.
The current density values are as follows, shown as the unshifted value
for the field followed by the shifted number for the
.Sq c
partition of drive 0.
The device names are the conventional names for the raw devices
in the
.Pa /dev
directory.
.Bl -column header valuex "360K 5.25XX" media "rfd[0-1]_1200_5.25"
.Sy \&	value	drive type	media	device name
	0/0-7	any	any	rfd[0-1][a-h]
	1/34	360K 5.25	360K
	2/66	1.2M 5.25	1.2M	rfd[0-1]_1200_5.25
	3/98	720K 3.5	720K
	4/130	1.44M 3.5	1.44M	rfd[0-1]_1440_3.5
	5/162	1.2M 5.25	720K	rfd[0-1]_720_5.25
	6/194	1.2M 5.25	360K	rfd[0-1]_360_5.25
	7/226	1.44M 3.5	720K	rfd[0-1]_720_3.5
.El
.Pp
The floppy disk driver provides both a block device interface
and a raw device interface.
The block device is used when mounting a file system on a floppy disk,
and the raw device is used for all other purposes.
Normally floppy disks are used without disk labels using the raw
partition, for example
.Pa /dev/rfd0c .
However, if a disk label is present, it will be observed.
.Pp
Floppies may be formatted with the command
.Xr fdformat 1 .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/rfd[0-1][a-h] -compact
.It Pa /dev/fd[0-1][a-h]
block files
.It Pa /dev/rfd[0-1][a-h]
raw files
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fdformat 8 ,
.Xr disklabel 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in Berkeley Networking-2.
.Sh BUGS
The current driver supports only one floppy disk controller and two drives.
