.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\" BSDI $Id: hpp.4,v 1.1 1994/01/31 08:41:40 donn Exp $
.Dd January 30, 1994
.Dt HPP 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hpp
.Nd
.Tn HP
EtherTwist PC LAN Adapter/16 Plus
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device hpp0 at isa? port 0x2c0 iomem 0xc8000 iosiz 2048"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm hpp
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network.
It supports the
HP 27247B PC LAN Adapter/16 TP Plus [AUI/UTP] and the
HP 27252A PC LAN Adapter/16 TL Plus [AUI/BNC]
It uses a block of 32 i/o ports in the range 0x100 through 0x3e0.
The block must be aligned on a 32 port boundary.
The base port and memory address are set a manufacturer-provided
setup program using manual configuration..
It uses an 2 kilobyte shared memory area at a 16KB-aligned address
from 0xC8000 through 0xEC000.
The memory address in the config file must agree with the address
used when the card was configured.
The hardware interrupt level may be read from the card
or specified in the config file entry.
.Pp
Each of the host's network addresses
is specified at boot time with an
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl .
The
.Xr hpp
interface employs the address resolution protocol described in
.Xr arp 4
to dynamically map between Internet and Ethernet addresses on the local
network.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr arp 4
.Sh AUTHOR
Written for use in BSD/386 by Kevin Fall (kfall@cs.ucsd.edu).
