.\" Copyright (c) 1992, 1993 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: lp.4,v 1.2 1993/03/08 16:21:24 polk Exp $
.Dd February 27, 1993
.Dt LP 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lp
.Nd parallel printer driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device lp0 at isa? port 0x378 flags 1"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm lp
driver supports standard PC compatible parallel output ports.
Each device uses a block of 4 i/o ports.  The block must be aligned on
an 4 port boundary.  Each device should have its own interrupt.  The
driver attempts to detect the hardware interrupt level at
autoconfiguration; however, this may fail if the printer is off line.
If no interrupt is detected, then the default of 7 is used if the
device is at the standard LPT1 address, otherwise, no interrupt is
used.  You may specify an explicit interrupt number in the kernel
config file if desired.  The driver polls the device periodically, so
if the printer has a reasonable sized buffer, throughput will be
acceptable even without using an interrupt.
.Pp
Newline is translated to carriage-return/linefeed if the
.Ar flags
field in the kernel config file is set to 0.
This
translation is prevented by setting
.Ar flags
to 1 in the kernel config file.
Translation of newlines is likely to be removed from future versions
of this driver, with any translation being done in user-level software.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa /dev/lp[0-1]
.El
