.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.Dd January 14, 1994
.Dt MCD 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mcd
.Nd Mitsumi CD-ROM driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device mcd0 at isa? port 0x334 irq 9"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The special files
.Pa /dev/mcd[%d][a-h]
and
.Pa /dev/rmcd[%d][a-h]
provide block and raw access to the Mitsumi CRMC CD-ROM disk drive
using its associated ISA bus controller.  This drive has very poor
random access performance, but it can read a string of contiguous
blocks a the full disk speed.  To improve the average performance, the
driver contains a 32K byte read-ahead buffer.  This buffer is also
used to allow random access to the device, without regard to the 2048
byte physical sector size.
.Pp
The controller does not support interrupt auto-configuration, so the
kernel config file irq specification should contain an explicit
interrupt number, chosen from the set 3, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12 or 15.  
Make sure the irq jumper on the card agrees with the config file
value (and note that the jumper for interrupt 2 corresponds to
software level 9).  On very fast machines, or machines with light
interrupt loading, it is possible to use the driver without
interrupts.  To do this, omit the irq specification from the config
file and remove the interrupt jumper.  Using the driver in this
mode can cause undetected read errors.
.Pp
The controller occupies 4 io ports with base port in the range
0x300 to 0x3fc.  The port is configured using a dip switch on the
controller card.
.Pp
The driver supports both DMA and non-DMA operation for both the
8-bit and 16-bit versions of the controller.
.Pp
When no BSD label is present on a loaded CD-ROM, the driver will
generate a default label which defines the `a' and `h' partitions
to represent the entire disk.
.Pp
To control the audio play functions of the drive, see the library
.Xr cdrom 3 .
.Pp
In this experimental version of the driver, the ioctl
.Dv MCDIOCSETBUF
can be used to change the size of the read-ahead buffer.  This
command is unsafe if it is given while there is an outstanding read
request, so be careful to use it only when the drive is idle.  The
argument is a pointer to an integer, which must be a multiple of
2048 and less than or equal to 256K bytes.
.Sh
DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It mcd%d: no disk in drive
.sp 1
Operation failed because the drive is empty, or the door is not
shut.
.Pp
.It mcd%d: premature status %x %x
.It mcd%d: unexpected data %x %x
.It mcd%d: command error %x
.It mcd%d: too few status bytes: %d
.It mcd%d: command time out
.It mcd%d: block %d: read error
.sp 1
These are various errors that can occur when trying to read.  Check
that the disk is a CD-ROM, as opposed CD-AUDIO.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa /dev/cdrom
.It Pa /dev/rcdrom
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cdrom 3
.El
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm mcd
driver first appeared in BSDI.
