.\" Copyright (c) 1992, 1993 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: ne.4,v 1.4 1993/03/08 16:21:25 polk Exp $
.\"
.Dd October 9, 1992
.Dt NE 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ne
.Nd
.Td Novell
NE1000/NE2000 Ethernet interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ne0 at isa? port 0x360"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm ne
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network.  It uses a
jumper-selectable block of 32 I/O ports in the range 0x300 through 0x360.  The block must be
aligned on a 32 port boundary.  The jumper-selectable hardware interrupt level is
detected at autoconfiguration time or alternatively may be specified in the system
configuration file. Supported IRQs are: 2(9), 3, 4 and 5.
An NE1000 can be installed in any 8-bit or 16-bit slot; an NE2000
should be installed in a 16-bit slot.
The type of interface (10BASE-2/BNC or
AUI/DIX) is selected by the on-board jumpers.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be printed during autoconfiguration:
.Bl -diag
.It ne%d: invalid i/o base address %x
.br
Invalid port specification in kernel config file.
.Pp
.It ne%d: invalid IRQ number %d
.br
Invalid IRQ specification in kernel config file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr arp 4
.Sh BUGS
Some NE1000 cards won't be found by autoconfiguration
if the Ethernet cable is not connected.
Transmission of data over disconnected cable is not supported.
This is a hardware problem.
.Sh HISTORY
The NE2000
.Nm ne
driver first appeared in Berkeley Networking-2.
The NE1000 support was added in BSD/386.
