.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: pccons.4,v 1.2 1994/01/31 08:41:42 donn Exp $
.Dd January 31, 1994
.Dt PCCONS 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pccons ,
.Nm kbd
.Nd PC keyboard and text mode display driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device pccons0 at isa? port 0x60"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports standard PC-AT keyboards in several different modes.
The driver uses a monochrome or color display adaptor (MDA, CGA, EGA
or VGA-compatible) in text mode.
.Pp
The device
.Pa /dev/conskbd0
represents the text mode display and keyboard,
which is normally accessed via the indirect console driver
.Xr cons 4
and the device
.Pa /dev/console .
This device acts as a standard tty device as described by
.Xr tty 4 .
In addition, the
.Nm
driver supports the use of several additional text-mode
.Dq virtual screens ,
normally known as
.Pa /dev/ttyc2
and up.
The number of screens is eight including
the primary on a color display;
monochrome supports only one because the standard display memory
is insufficient for multiple screens.
.Pp
While in text mode, the active display can be changed to another open
screen by pressing the corresponding function key while holding
down the ALT key.
That is, ALT-F1 switches to the primary display, ALT-F2 switches
to the next display
.Ns ( Pa /dev/ttyc2 ) ,
etc.
This key press is ignored if the corresponding device is not open.
.Pp
The mappings from key codes to characters and escape sequences
is specified by a keyboard mapping table compiled into the kernel.
An optional table may be compiled into the kernel by placing a line
such as
.Dl "options KBD=UK"
in the kernel config file,
which specifies the
.Li UK
mapping.
The kernel config line
.Dl "options CAPSLOCK_CONTROL" 
replaces the caps-lock key with a control key.
The table sources are located in the
.Pa i386/isa/kbd
subdirectory of the kernel source.
.Pp
The escape sequences and controls for the display are described by the
.Li pc3
entry in the
.Xr termcap 5
database.
They are a substantial subset of the ANSI terminal controls as supported
on terminals such as the VT220.
In addition, many of the standard PC console escape sequences are supported
as described in the iBSC2 compatibility specification,
including the sequences to change colors and font types.
.Pp
If the terminal size is changed with
.Xr stty 1
and its
.Li rows
operand, the emulator will use the new size if it is no greater than 25 lines.
Thus, the command
.Li "clear; stty rows 24"
allows a 24-line display to be used.
.Pp
The
.Nm kbd
device,
.Pa /dev/kbd ,
provides an alternate interface to the console keyboard.
While open, it suspends normal operations on the text-mode devices.
This device is usually used in conjunction with the
.Xr vga 4
device for graphics-mode programs.
While the
.Nm kbd
device is open, normal text-mode access to the display
via the console devices
is suspended.
.Pp
Several
.Xr ioctl 2
operations are provided primarily for use on the
.Nm kbd
device, in particular to place the keyboard into a raw mode
which returns make and break keycodes rather than the standard
character sequences.
.Sh FILES
.Pa /dev/conskbd0 ,
.Pa /dev/ttyc[2-8] ,
.Pa /dev/kbd
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cons 4 ,
.Xr vga 4,
.Xr vgafont 1
