.\"	BSDI $Id: rc.4,v 1.3 1994/02/01 23:13:20 donn Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 1992, 1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.Dd February 1, 1994
.Dt RC 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rc
.Nd
.Tn SDL Communications
RISCom/8 8-port serial multiplexor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device rc0 at isa? port 0x220"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The RISCom/8 is an eight port
.Tn EIA
.Tn RS-232C
.Pf ( Tn CCITT
.Tn V.28 )
communications multiplexor.  It uses a block of 16 I/O ports in the
range 0x200 to 0x3f0 selectable by on-board switches. The block must
be aligned on a 16 port
boundary. The jumper-selectable hardware interrupt level is detected during
autoconfiguration or alternatively can be specified in the system
configuration file (in this case no check is performed). \%RISCom/8 supports
the following irqs: 2(9), 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12 or 15.
It can be installed in an 8-bit or 16-bit ISA slot (irqs 10 and higher
require a 16-bit slot).
.Pp
Each port may be independently set to any speed between 50 and 76800 bits per second.
Note that the 57600 speed is not exact (it is slow by about 3%).
Also, the chip on the RISCom/8 may not be able to run all ports
at the highest rates simultaneously.
The aggregate capacity is about 460800 bits per second.
.Pp
An open on the rc driver will block until carrier is present, unless
O_NONBLOCK or CLOCAL is set.
.Pp
Multiple RISCom/8 boards may be present in the system at one time.
The least significant three bits of the minor device number select the
line within a card, and the next three bits select the card number.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It rc%d: illegal base address %x
.sp
Invalid port specification in kernel config file.
.Pp
.It rc%d: illegal IRQ %d
.sp
Invalid irq specification in kernel config file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tty 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver
first appeared in BSDI.
