.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: rh.4,v 1.1 1993/03/08 16:21:26 polk Exp $
.\"
.Dd March 1, 1993
.Dt RH 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rh
.Nd
.Tn SDL Communications
RISCom/H2 dual high-speed synchronous interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device rh0 at isa? port 0x240 drq 6"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm rh
interface provides two point-to-point bit-synchronous serial connections
with speeds up to 4 Mb/s using HDLC frame format.
It uses a switch-selectable block of 8 I/O ports in the range
0x200 through 0x3f0.
The block must be aligned on a 16 port boundary.
The jumper-selectable interrupt level is
detected at autoconfiguration time or alternatively can be
specified in the system configuration file.
Supported IRQs are: 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12 and 15.
No I/O memory is used.
A 16-bit DMA channel should be specified in the kernel
configuration file and selected by on-board jumpers; supported
DRQs are 5, 6 and 7.
The RISCom/H2 board should be installed in a 16-bit slot.
.Pp
Currently the
.Nm rh
interface supports synchronous Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)
and Cisco
.Tn HDLC
encapsulation with SLARP.
The link-level protocol is selected by the
.Dv IFF_LINK0
flag with an
.Dv SIOCSIFFLAGS
.Xr ioctl 2
(see
.Xr ifconfig 8 ) .
To select PPP set the
.Dv IFF_LINK0
interface flag; clearing it selects Cisco
.Tn HDLC
encapsulation.
.Pp
To include PPP and Cisco
.Tn HDLC
code, the kernel configuration file should specify
.Li "options PPP"
and/or
.Li "options CISCO_HDLC"
respectively.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be printed during autoconfiguration:
.Bl -diag
.It rh%d: illegal base address %x
.br
Invalid port specification in kernel config file.
.It rh%d: illegal drq %d
.br
Invalid DRQ specification in kernel config file.
.It rh%d: illegal IRQ %d
.br
Invalid IRQ specification in kernel config file.
.It rh%d: no memory for the channel 1 data
.br
The attach routine cannot allocate memory for the
channel 1.
Should never happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr ppp 4 ,
.Xr cisco_hdlc 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh BUGS
The RISCom/H2 board uses cascade DMA mode which is known
not to work on some motherboards.
Make sure your motherboard works correctly with the RISCom/H2
using the manufacturer-supplied test program.
.Pp
The maximal transmission speed may vary depending on the
processor speed and ISA bus timing parameters.
