.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: rn.4,v 1.1 1993/03/08 16:21:27 polk Exp $
.\"
.Dd March 1, 1993
.Dt RN 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rn
.Nd
.Tn SDL Communications
RISCom/N1 high-speed synchronous interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device rn0 at isa? port 0x220 iomem 0xe0000 iosiz 65536"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm rn
interface provides a point-to-point bit-synchronous serial connection
with speeds up to 4 Mb/s using HDLC frame format.
It uses a switch-selectable block of 8 I/O ports in the range
0x200 through 0x3f0.
The block must be aligned on a 16 port boundary.
The jumper-selectable interrupt level is
detected at autoconfiguration time or alternatively can be
specified in the system configuration file.
Supported IRQs are: 2(9), 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 12 and 15.
The RISCom/N1 board requires a 16, 32 or 64 Kb I/O memory window
aligned at a 16 KB boundary (the base address and size should be
specified in the system configuration file).
The RISCom/N1 board should be installed in a 16-bit slot.
.Pp
Currently the
.Nm rn
interface supports synchronous Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)
and Cisco
.Tn HDLC
encapsulation.
The link-level protocol is selected by the
.Dv IFF_LINK0
flag with an
.Dv SIOCSIFFLAGS
.Xr ioctl 2
(see
.Xr ifconfig 8 ) .
To select PPP set the
.Dv IFF_LINK0
interface flag; clearing it selects Cisco
.Tn HDLC
encapsulation.
.Pp
To include PPP and Cisco
.Tn HDLC
code, the kernel configuration file should specify
.Li "options PPP"
and/or
.Li "options CISCO_HDLC"
respectively.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be printed during autoconfiguration:
.Bl -diag
.It rn%d: illegal base address %x
.br
Invalid port specification in kernel config file.
.It rn%d: illegal memory window size %d
.br
Invalid I/O memory window size in kernel config file.
.It rn%d: non-aligned memory window (at %x)
.br
Invalid I/O memory base address in kernel config file.
.It rn%d: can't alloc memory
.br
The probe routine cannot allocate temporary memory.
Should never happen.
.It rn%d: illegal IRQ %d
.br
Invalid IRQ specification in kernel config file.
.It rn%d: init failed
.br
Initialization sequence failed \- hardware problem.
.It rn%d: memory test failed
.br
Error in on-board memory; this is a hardware problem.
.It rn%d: no response
.br
Network controller not responding; this is a hardware
problem.
.It rn%d: lost intr
.br
Lost interrupt. This is a warning.
.It rn%d: invalid status %x
.br
Invalid status code received from network controller;
most likely cause is incorrect ISA bus timing.
.It rn%d: tx queue botched (0x%x)
.br
Buffer list corrupted due to data error in I/O memory;
most likely cause is incorrect ISA bus timing.
.It rn%d: status table overflow
.br
Network controller indicates status table owerflow;
the problem may be caused by dribble on interface
control leads.
.It rn%d: cannot set modes
.br
Loading link parameters in the network controller
failed.
This is a hardware problem.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr ppp 4 ,
.Xr cisco_hdlc 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
