.\" Id: si.4,v 1.2 1993/09/09 10:22:01 andy Exp
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Andy Rutter, Advanced Methods and Tools Ltd.
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\" BSDI $Id: si.4,v 1.1 1994/01/31 08:41:45 donn Exp $
.Dd January 31, 1994
.Dt SI 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm si
.Nd
Specialix International
SLXOS 8-32 port communications multiplexor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device si0 at isa? iomem 0x0d8000 iosiz 65536
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Specialix SLXOS is an 8 to 32 port
.Tn EIA
.Tn RS-232C
.Pf ( Tn CCITT
.Tn V.28 )
communications multiplexor for ISA bus machines (the hardware is also
available for EISA and MCA machines, but this driver has not been
tested on those configurations).
The driver will support both SI and XIO types of controller (TA
and MTA terminal adapters).
.Pp
The controller uses a memory block within the ISA bus "hole" between
0xa0000 and 0xfffff. The controller memory address can be set outside
this range, but the driver does not currently support this.
Irqs 11, 12 or 15 can be used, either specified via the config
description or selected during autoconfiguration. The controller
is soft configured to the appropriate interrupt.
.Pp
The si driver is not fully initialised at kernel bootstrap time
as firmware code must first be downloaded to the the controller. This
is performed by
.Xr siconfig 8 ,
normally invoked from 
.Pa /etc/rc .
.Pp
Each port may be independently set to any speed between 75 and 57600
baud (115200 on XIO).
As B38400 is the highest available
.Xr termios 4
selectable speed,
B50 is mapped to 57600 (and B110 is mapped to 115200 on XIO).
.Pp
An open on the si driver will block until carrier is present, unless
O_NONBLOCK or CLOCAL is set. Alternatively, a soft carrier state can be set
for each port via the
.Xr siconfig 8
utility - this has the effect of simulating the presence of DCD.
.Pp
Up to two SLXOS boards may be present in the system at one time.
The least significant five bits (bits 1-5) of the minor device number select
the port within a controller card, the next bit (bit 6) selects the controller.
Bit 8 is used to select a controlling device for use by
.Xr siconfig 8
\&(/dev/si_control is minor device 128).
.Pp
Bit 7 is reserved for selection of the printer port found on
many asynchronous terminals - this is referred to as
the XPRINT interface. Two device nodes are used to reference the
same physical line: for example /dev/ttya0 (minor = 0)
and /dev/ttya0_xp (minor = 64).
When the appropriate printer port enable and disable strings are set via
.Xr siconfig 8 ,
data sent to /dev/ttya0_xp will appear on the
terminal's printer port.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -tag -width 4n
.It SLXOS si%d: iomem (%x) out of range
Invalid base memory address specification in kernel config file.
.It SLXOS si%d: %s not supported
Unsupported controller type detected.
.It SLXOS si%d: download beyond ram at offset 0x%x
Attempt to load firmware outside the controller RAM range - usually caused
by a corrupt download file.
.It SLXOS si%d: startup timeout - aborting
The controller failed to initialise after 5 seconds.
.It SLXOS si%d: %s - no ports found
No terminal ports found on the controller
.It SLXOS si%d: Z280 version error - initstat %x
An unexpected status was returned from the controller CPU.
.It SLXOS si%d: extra ports ignored
More ports were reported by the controller than are configured into the driver.
This error should not happen!
.It SLXOS si%d: unknown module type %d
An unknown terminal adapter type was reported by the controller.
.It SLXOS si%d: fail to malloc memory for port structs
This should never happen!
.It SLXOS si%d: %d ports
Report of number of terminal adapter ports found.
.It SLXOS si%d: Warning interrupt handler re-entered
This should never happen!
.It SLXOS [sx]i%d(%d): <debugging message>
A vast range of driver debugging can be enabled via
.Xr siconfig 8 .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/si_control -compact
.It Pa /dev/si_control
driver control interface - used by
.Xr siconfig 8
.It Pa /dev/tty[ab]*
ports
.It Pa /dev/tty[ab]*_xp
XPRINT ports
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr termios 4 ,
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr siconfig 8 .
