.\"  tn.4 Copyright 1993, South Coast Computing Services, Inc.
.\"  Released for unrestricted use, provided the file is not modified.
.Dd July 22, 1993
.Dt TN 4 i386
.Os BSD 4.3
.Sh NAME
.Nm tn
.Nd
.Tn TNIC-1500
.Tn ISA bus
10 Mb/s Ethernet interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device tn0 at isa? port 0x320 drq 6 flags 0x44108A04"
.Cd "options TNDEBUG"
.Cd "ifconfig tn0 [-]debug"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm tn
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network through
the
.Tn TNIC-1500
.Tn ISA bus
controller.  The controller is based on the AMD Am79C960 PCnet-ISA
chip in bus master DMA mode.  The cards are available through
.Tn South Coast Computing Services, Inc.
.Pp
The driver provides a standard ethernet device interface.
In addition, it will provide a diagnostic dump when the
ifconfig debug command is issued.  If the TNDEBUG option was configured
into the kernel, the ifconfig debug command will cause per-packet
and other trace information to be printed.  The trace can be
deactivated by issuing an ifconfig -debug command.
.Pp
The driver discovers the irq setting, but the DMA channel
number must be configured in.  The recommended settings of
port 0x320, drq 6, and irq 12 minimize conflicts with other
standard devices.  In particular, the Adaptec SCSI host adapter
use drq 5 and irq 11 by default.
.Pp
The flags field of the configuration line is used to set DMA
read and write pulse widths and to define the LED functions.
Unused portions may be left at zero, in which case the chip's
defaults are used.  The low-order three bytes are the LED1-3 enable
masks; the low-order byte is LED1.  See the include file
i386/isa/ic/am79c960.h for the bit assignments.
.Pp
The high-order byte of the flags word is the
DMA pulse width control, with the first digit specifying the
read pulse width and the second digit specifying the write
pulse width.  The numbers are in fifty nanosecond units with a default
value of five (250ns).  Reducing these values will reduce the
bus overhead, but many motherboards will not let you get away with it.
.Sh ADVERTISEMENT
For information or to order TNIC-1500 boards, contact South Coast
by any of the following means:
.br
Email sales@sccsi.com
.br
Telephone +1 713 661 3301
.br
FAX +1 713 661 0633
.br
Mail P.O. Box 270355 Houston, TX 77277 USA
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
The Am79c960 datasheet
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm tn
driver was written by Steve Nuchia of South Coast Computing Services, Inc.
and published in July of 1993.  See the source file /sys/i386/isa/if_tn.c
for copyright information.
