.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\" BSDI $Id: we.4,v 1.4 1994/01/31 08:41:46 donn Exp $
.Dd January 30, 1994
.Dt WE 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm we
.Nd
.Tn "Western Digital" / "Standard Microsystem Corporation"
WD8003, WD8013, Ethercard PLUS, Elite, Ultra
and
.Tn 3Com
3C503 Ethernet interfaces.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device we0 at isa? port 0x280 iomem 0xd0000 iosiz 16384"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm we
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network.
It supports three types of hardware interface: the Western Digital/SMC
8003/8013 (Elite) series, the SMC Ultra, and the 3Com 3C503.
.Pp
The Western Digital/SMC Elite and SMC Ultra cards use a
block of 32 I/O ports in the range 0x200 through 0x3e0.  The block must be
aligned on a 32 port boundary.  The hardware interrupt level is
detected at autoconfiguration time.
The base port and memory address are set via jumpers or a manufacturer-provided
setup program.
A memory size of up to 64 KB is supported, although most cards have 16 KB
of memory; supported values are 8 KB, 16 KB, 32 KB and 64 KB.
.Pp
The 3Com 3C503 uses a block of 16 I/O ports beginning with one of the these
bases:
0x250, 0x280, 0x2a0, 0x2e0, 0x300, 0x310, 0x330, 0x350.
The hardware interrupt level is chosen during autoconfiguration.
It uses an 8 kilobyte shared memory area at one of the following addresses:
0xc8000, 0xcc000, 0xd8000, or 0xdc000.
If the memory address is specified in the configuration file,
that address will be selected; otherwise, the address specified
by jumpers will be used.
.Pp
The method for selection of the Ethernet connection type and
other options differ for the three types of cards.
.Pp
On the WD/SMC Elite (8003/8013) cards, the connection type
is set via jumpers on the card or by the manufacturer-supplied
setup program.
By default, these cards run in 16-bit mode if a 16-bit card is installed
in a 16-bit slot; this is desirable for best performance.
If the configured iosiz is 8192, the card will be used in 8-bit mode.
If 16-bit operation
causes problems for 8-bit cards in the same 128 KB memory segment,
the card can be left in 8-bit mode except while copying data to or from
the card by setting the
.Dv IFF_LINK2
flag (using the
.Li link2
option to
.Xr ifconfig 8 ) .
8-bit operation can be forced at all times by setting the
.Dv IFF_LINK1
flag.
(Currently, this option may result in extremely poor performance
due to packet loss or corruption.)
Finally, if the kernel is booted with autoconfiguration debugging
set to 2 (using
.Li "-autodebug 2"  ,
see
.Xr boot 8 ) ,
the driver asks whether to run in 16-bit mode,
and 8-bit mode may be selected.
.Pp
The connection type for the SMC Ultra cards is specified using
the manufacturer-supplied setup program and/or the device flags.
The
.Dv IFF_LINK0
flag must be set for the use of the BNC connector
(using the
.Li link0
option of
.Xr ifconfig 8 ) ,
and must be unset for use of the AUI or twisted-pair connectors.
The SMC Ultra cards use 16-bit mode when installed in a 16-bit slot.
.Pp
On the 3C503, the physical interface is selected with the 
.Dv IFF_LINK0
flag.  When set (for example, when
.Li link0 is specified to
.Xr ifconfig ) ,
the thin coax interface is used.  When clear (\c
.Li -link0 ) ,
the AUI connector is used.
.Pp
Each of the host's network addresses
is specified at boot time with an
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl .
The
.Xr we
interface employs the address resolution protocol described in
.Xr arp 4
to dynamically map between Internet and Ethernet addresses on the local
network.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be printed during autoconfiguration:
.Bl -diag
.It we%d: illegal memory size.
.sp 1
Invalid iosiz specification in kernel config file.
.Pp
.It we%d: illegal memory alignment.
.sp 1
Invalid iomem specification in kernel config file.
.Pp
.It we%d: %s dual port RAM address error
.sp 1
The iomem specified in the kernel config file conflicts with some other
device on the bus, or the Ethernet board may be bad.
The board may be in 8-bit mode but in a 128 KB block containing a 16-bit
memory device.
.Pp
.It we%d: no irq available for %s
.sp 1
Automatic interrupt selection was enabled, but all usable interrupts
had already been claimed by other devices.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr arp 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm we
driver first appeared in Berkeley Networking-2.
