.\"	BSDI:	$Id: wt.4,v 1.6 1994/01/14 07:19:26 donn Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"
.Dd January 14, 1994
.Dt WT 4 i386
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm wt
.Nd
Wangtek
.Tn QIC-02 / QIC-36
streamer tape interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device wt0 at isa? port 0x300 bio irq 5 drq 1 vector wtintr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Wangtek
.Tn QIC-02 / QIC-36
transport combination provides a subset of the standard tape drive
interface as described in
.Xr mtio 4 .
The driver supports QIC150 (150MB), QIC120 and QIC24 cartidges tapes.
.Pp
The device does not allow positioning the tape on specific blocks within files;
opening the tape device will guarantee that the tape is at the beginning of
a file (or at the beginning of unrecorded media).
On open, the tape will be rewound (if the cartridge was
changed) or positioned after the file mark of the last file read/written
(if non-rewinding mode was used).
The
.Xr mtio 4
operations
.Dv MTFSR ,
.Dv MTBSR ,
.Dv MTCACHE
and
.Dv MTNOCACHE
are not supported (the first two will generate an error condition).
.Pp
The modes of tape's operation (rewinding/non-rewinding and density
selection) are encoded
in the minor device number as following (for the tape drive 0):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
003	unit select
  0	unit zero
  1	unit one

004	no rewind

030	density select
 0	QIC150
 1	QIC120
 2	QIC24
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It wt0: write protected
An attempt was made to write on the tape drive
when the write protection switch was in "safe" position;
this message is written on the terminal of
the user who tried to access the tape.
.Pp
.It wt0: no tape inserted
An attempt was made to access the tape while there was no
tape cartridge inserted into the drive;
this message is written on the terminal of the user
who tried to access the tape.
.Pp
.It wt0: illegal command
.It wt0: drive not online
.It wt0: read status failed
A hardware failure of undefined nature occured;
this "cannot happen" on properly operated device.
Sometimes these messages can be generated if the user tried
to remove or handle tape cartridge while an operation was in progress.
These messages will be written on the terminal of the user
who tried to read or write the tape.
.Pp
.It wt0: unrecoverable data error
An unrecoverable data error occured while reading or writing
the tape; usually it means that the tape is bad or that the user
is trying to read unrecorded tape.
The drive tries to recover from data errors; if this message appears
it is useless to retry reading or writing any further. 
This message is written on the terminal of the user
who tried to access the tape.
.Pp
.It wt0: no data detected
An attempt was made to read past recorded data or the tape is bad;
this error is fatal and it's useless to retry reading.
This message is written on the terminal of the user
who tried to read the tape.
.Pp
.It wt0: block not located
An unrecoverable error occured while reading
the tape; usually it means that the tape was not recorded properly
or is bad; this error is fatal.
This message is written on the terminal of the user
who tried to read the tape.
.Pp
.It wt0: end of recorded media
An attempt was made to read past recorded data or read or write
past the end of tape; this error is fatal.
This message is written on the terminal of the user
who tried to read the tape.
.Pp
.It wt0: hit end of tape
End of tape was reached during reading or writing tape with
continuation mode disabled. This error is fatal and the operation
cannot be continued; the tape should be rewound first.
This message is written on the terminal of the user
who was writing the tape.
.Pp
.It wt0: bad DRQ number %d (hardware supports only 1-3)
There is an error in the system configuration; the system administrator
should correct the configuration and recompile the kernel. This message
is written on console during bootstrapping the system.
.Pp
.It wt0: strategy
A user tried to access the tape through block device interface;
the system administrator should remove the special files in order to
prevent printing this message in future. This message is written on console.
.Pp
.It wt0: extra interrupt
.It wt0: bogus interrupt
These messages can appear spontaneously; usually as a result of minor
faults in device hardware or bus interface. Ignore these messages if
they aren't frequent; frequently occurence of these messages is a sign
of a hardware fault or hardware configuration problems like assigning the
same IRQ to the multiple devices. These message are written on console.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/nrwt[0-1]_q150 -compact
.It Pa /dev/rwt[0-1]_q150
auto rewind on close QIC150
.It Pa /dev/rwt[0-1]_q120
auto rewind on close QIC120
.It Pa /dev/rwt[0-1]_q24
auto rewind on close QIC24
.It Pa /dev/nrwt[0-1]_q150
no rewind on close QIC150
.It Pa /dev/nrwt[0-1]_q120
no rewind on close QIC120
.It Pa /dev/nrwt[0-1]_q24
no rewind on close QIC24
.It Pa /dev/rwt[0-1]
alias for /dev/rwt[0-1]_q150
.It Pa /dev/nrwt[0-1]
alias for /dev/nrwt[0-1]_q150
.It Pa /dev/rwt[4-5]
alias for /dev/nrwt[0-1]_q150
.El
.Sh BUGS
The 125MB tape format is not supported.
