'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1989-1993 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" All rights reserved.
'\"
'\" Permission is hereby granted, without written agreement and without
'\" license or royalty fees, to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose, provided that the above copyright
'\" notice and the following two paragraphs appear in all copies.
'\"
'\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA BE LIABLE TO ANY PARTY
'\" FOR DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
'\" ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THIS DOCUMENTATION, EVEN IF THE UNIVERSITY OF
'\" CALIFORNIA HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
'\"
'\" THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS ANY WARRANTIES,
'\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
'\" AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS
'\" ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, AND THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA HAS NO OBLIGATION TO
'\" PROVIDE MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT, UPDATES, ENHANCEMENTS, OR MODIFICATIONS.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/tcl/grot/doc/CmdCmplt.3,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/03 23:15:11 polk Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.so man.macros
.HS Tcl_CommandComplete tclc
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_CommandComplete \- Check for unmatched braces in a Tcl command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTcl_CommandComplete\fR(\fIcmd\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS char *cmd
.AP char *cmd in
Command string to test for completeness.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTcl_CommandComplete\fR takes a Tcl command string
as argument and determines whether it contains one or more
complete commands (i.e. there are no unclosed quotes, braces,
brackets, or variable references).
If the command string is complete then it returns 1; otherwise it returns 0.

.SH KEYWORDS
complete command, partial command
