.\" Copyright (c) 1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.Dd January 30, 1994
.Dt MSDOSFS 4
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm msdosfs
.Nd DOS FAT-12/FAT-16 file system
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm mount
.Fl Ar t msdos
.Op Fl o Ar opts
.Ar special
.Ar node
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm msdosfs
file system supports mounting DOS format floppies and 
disk partitions as part of the file system hierarchy.
.Pp
Since the underlying file system doesn't support owners, groups
or permissions in the 
.Bx 
sense, all files appear to be owned 
by user
.Em root 
and group 
.Em wheel , 
and are readable and executable
by everyone.  The write bit is used to indicate whether the 
file is 
.Em hidden
or not.  
.Em Hidden
files (in the DOS sense) will lack write permission; they 
will be visible in the 
.Bx 
file system hierarchy.
.Pp
Since the FAT file system only supports modification times, 
inode change time and last access time will be reported 
the same as the modification time.  Additionally, since the
FAT file system does not maintain directory modification 
time, directories always appear to have been modified.
.Pp
The FAT file system limits the form of names to a 
maximum of 8 characters with a 3 letter extension.  The 
.Nm msdosfs
file system will silently truncate names to conform with 
this requirement.  
.Nm Msdosfs
will also fold all names to lower case.
.Pp
Since all files are readable, writable, and executable by everyone,
it is probably a good idea to mount DOS file systems read-only on
multi-user systems.  Likewise, they should be mounted under an
appropriately protected directory if additional access restrictions
are desired.
.Pp
The
.Nm msdosfs
file system is exportable via NFS.
.Sh BUGS
.Pp
While checks are performed to ensure names conform to length and 
case specifications, there isn't any clear standard which defines
what characters are legal in FAT file system file names.  No additional
checks are performed to ensure all characters in file names are 
legal for any particular version of DOS, so it is possible to create
files that are not accessible from some versions of DOS.  This is 
usually not a problem since most (all?) versions of DOS will ignore
such files \- they simply won't be visible to DOS commands.
