.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1993 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: sd.4,v 1.2 1993/03/23 22:56:12 polk Exp $
.Dd March 23, 1993
.Dt SD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sd
.Nd machine-independent SCSI disk driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "options SCSI"
.Cd "disk sd0 at tg?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm sd
driver for disks on the Small Computer System Interface
(ANSI X3.131-1992) bus is a machine-independent generic device
which employs machine-dependent drivers for individual host adapters
to read and write data blocks.
The
.Nm sd
driver takes care of queuing requests and sorting them
by cylinder address on each logical unit;
generating the correct read and write SCSI Command Descriptor Blocks,
along with inquiry, test unit ready and other common operations;
reading and writing disk labels;
classifying SCSI errors and gathering extended error information;
and probing for logical units on SCSI targets
and identifying their type.
The driver also supports an interface for raw SCSI commands;
see
.Xr scsicmd 8 .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/sd[0-6][a-h] -compact
.It Pa /dev/sd[0-6][a-h]
SCSI disk devices
.Sh "SEE ALSO
.Xr scsicmd 8 ,
.Xr st 4
.Sh HISTORY
This driver was written by Chris Torek for SPARC BSD, and
was contributed by his employer,
the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories.
.Sh BUGS
Errors returned by the driver consist of
a sense key and possible additional sense information.
The sense key is printed in English but
the myriad ASC and ASCQ values must be
decoded using the
.Fl a
option of
.Xr scsicmd .
.Pp
Standalone boot blocks and 14-sector bootstraps
are necessarily dependent on the host adapter.
There are no
.Pa sdboot
or
.Pa bootsd
files; these are instead named after individual host adapters.
.Pp
All zone recorded disks are treated as having a uniform geometry.
This means that rotational optimizations may be correct only
on some subset of the disk cylinders, if any.
