.\" Copyright (c) 1992,1993 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"	BSDI $Id: st.4,v 1.2 1993/03/23 22:56:14 polk Exp $
.Dd March 23, 1993
.Os
.Dt ST 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm st
.Nd machine-independent SCSI tape driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "options SCSI"
.Cd "tape st0 at tg? targetbase 0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm st
driver for tape drives on the Small Computer System Interface
(ANSI X3.131-1992) bus is a machine-independent generic device
which employs machine-dependent drivers for individual host adapters
to send commands to manipulate tapes.
The
.Nm st
driver takes care of opening the tape device,
locking out other users and serializing I/O;
generating the correct read and write Command Descriptor Blocks,
and handling specialized tape commands such as space forward,
write filemarks or rewind;
detecting errors and reporting them in a standard
way to the user's terminal;
and probing for logical units on SCSI targets
and classifying them according to their type.
The driver supports alternate tape densities on QIC drives
by encoding the SCSI tape density in the high 5 bits
of the minor device number.
The driver supports the standard
.Xr mt 1
tape motion commands.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/nrst[0-3] -compact
.It Pa /dev/rst[0-3]
auto-rewind tape devices
.It Pa /dev/nrst[0-3]
no-rewind tape devices
.It Pa /dev/rq11st0
force QIC-11 tape format
.It Pa /dev/rq150st0
force QIC-150 tape format
.It Pa /dev/rf8mm0
force fixed-length record 8mm tape format
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mt 1
.Sh HISTORY
Written by Donn Seeley of BSDI for BSD/386 0.3.
.Sh BUGS
Cooked tape doesn't work.
.Pp
Many SCSI-1 tapes don't support the SCSI
.Sq mode select
command, which the driver uses to select tape density.
The driver currently assumes that most tapes do support this feature;
this assumption may not be wise,
and it will break any tape that does not support it
and that isn't listed specifically in the driver.
Currently all Sankyo tapes and some Wangtek tapes
are assumed not to support mode selection.
.Pp
Most SCSI-1 tapes can't report tape position.
The Archive Viper 150 supports a read physical record number command
which gives somewhat different results from the SCSI-2 read position command.
.Pp
The default record mode on 8mm tape is variable-length records;
the specific SCSI 8mm densities are used to select fixed-length records.
This is a gross hack which will go away when
.Va dev_t
fields are widened.
For this reason,
there isn't any way to select EXB-8200 density on an EXB-8500.
.Pp
The
.Ar status
feature of
.Xr mt 1
is not very useful with SCSI tapes at this time.
