$Header: /bsdi/MASTER/BSDI_OS/contrib/flexfax/HOWTO,v 1.1.1.1 1994/01/14 23:09:26 torek Exp $

How To Obtain This Software (in case all you get is this file)
--------------------------------------------------------------
The source code is available for public ftp on
    sgi.com			sgi/fax/v2.2.src.tar.Z
	(192.48.153.1)

You can also obtain inst'able images for Silicon Graphics machines from
    sgi.com			sgi/fax/v2.2.inst.tar
	(192.48.153.1)

For example,
    % ftp -n sgi.com
    ....
    ftp> user anonymous
    ... <type in password>
    ftp> cd sgi/fax
    ftp> binary
    ftp> get v2.2.src.tar.Z

In general, the latest version of the 2.2 release of the software is
always available as "v2.2.src.tar.Z" or "v2.2.inst.tar" in the ftp
directory.  This file is a link to the appropriate released version (so
don't waste your time retrieving the linked file as well!) Any files of
the form v2.2.*.patch are shell scripts that can be used to patch older
versions of the source code.  For example, the file v2.2.1.patch would
contain patches to update v2.2.1.tar.Z.  (Note to beta testers: this is
different than the naming conventions used during beta testing.) Patch
files only work to go between consecutive versions, so if you are
multiple versions behind the latest release, you will need to apply
each patch file between your current version and the latest.


Obtaining the Software by Electronic Mail
-----------------------------------------
Do not send me requests for the software; they will be ignored (without
response).  If you cannot use FTP at all, there is a service called
"ftpmail" available from gatekeeper.dec.com:  you can send e-mail to
this machine and it will use FTP to retrieve files for you and send you
the files back again via e-mail.  To find out more about the ftpmail
service, send a message to "ftpmail@gatekeeper.dec.com" whose body
consists of the single line "help".


Obtaining the Software Within Silicon Graphics
----------------------------------------------
Internal to Silicon Graphics there are inst'able images on the host
flake.asd in the directory /usr/dist.  Thus you can do something like:

    % inst -f flake.asd.sgi.com:/usr/dist/flexfax

to install the latest version of the software on your machine.


What to do Once You've Retrieved Stuff
--------------------------------------
The external distributions come in a compressed or uncompressed tar
file.  To extract the source distribution:

    % zcat v2.2.src.tar.Z | tar xf -

(uncompress and extract individual files in current directory).  To
unpack and install the client portion of the inst'able distribution:

    % mkdir dist
    % cd dist; tar xf ../v2.2.inst.tar; cd ..
    % inst -f dist/flexfax
    ...
    inst> go

(Note, the dist subdirectory is because some versions of inst fail if
the files are in the current directory.) Server binaries are also
included in the inst'able images as flexfax.server.*.  They are not
installed by default, so to get them also you need to do:

    % inst -f flexfax
    ...
    inst> install flexfax.server.*
    inst> go

The SGI binaries were built for Version 4.0.5H of the IRIX operating
system.  They should work w/o problem on earlier versions of the
system, but I have not fully tested this.  Also, note that to install a
server on an SGI machine, you need to have installed the Display
PostScript execution environment product (dps_eoe).  Otherwise, the fax
server will not be able to convert PostScript to facsimile for
transmission.

If you are working from the source distribution, look at the file
README in the top of the source tree.  If you are working from the inst
images, the subsystem flexfax.man.readme contains the README file and
other useful pieces of information--the installed files are placed in
the directory /usr/local/doc/flexfax).  Basically you will need to run
the faxaddmodem script to setup and configure your fax modem.  Consult
the README file and the manual page for faxaddmodem for information.


FlexFAX Mail List
-----------------
A mailing list for users of this software is located on sgi.com.
If you want to join this mailing list or have a list-related request
such as getting your name removed from it, send a request to

    majordomo@whizzer.wpd.sgi.com

For example, to subscribe, send the line "subscribe flexfax" in
the body of your message.  The line "help" will return a list of
the commands understood by the mailing list management software.

Submissions (including bug reports) should be directed to:

    flexfax@sgi.com

When corresponding about this software please always specify what
version you have, what system you're running on, and, if the problem is
specific to your modem, identify the modem and firmware revision.
