.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1994 Berkeley Software Design, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" The Berkeley Software Design Inc. software License Agreement specifies
.\" the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	BSDI $Id: kerberos.8,v 1.1 1994/02/03 04:24:57 sanders Exp $
.\"
.Dd January 31, 1994
.Dt KERBEROS 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm kerberos
.Nd configuration procedure
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Edit
.Pa /etc/kerberosIV/krb.conf
to define the local realm and the administration server, e.g.:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
BSDI.COM
BSDI.COM BSDI.COM admin server
.Ed
.Pp
Run
.Xr kdb_init 8
to initialize the master database.
.Pp
Run
.Xr kstash 8
to store the master key.
.Pp
Uncomment the command
.Ql "kerberos >> /var/log/kerberos.log &"
in
.Pa /etc/rc.local .
Go ahead and start the
.Pa /usr/sbin/kerberos
daemon by hand also.
.Pp
Uncomment the lines for
.Ql "krbupdate
and
.Ql kpasswd
in
.Pa /etc/inetd.conf
and send inetd a SIGHUP.
.Pp
Run
.Ql "kdb_edit -n
and create entries for
.Ql rcmd.host
(where host is the hostname) for each host that will be running Kerberos.
Also, create a
.Ql kpasswd.host
for the main host (where host is the hostname).
.Pp
Create an
.Pa /.update.keyXX.XX.XX.XX
file (where XX.XX.XX.XX is the ip
address of the server machine) on each machine that should be able to
run the
.Xr register 1
program.  The contents are a single line with a string that is the shared
password.
.Pp
Create
.Pa /etc/kerberosIV/register_keys/.update.keyXX.XX.XX.XX
on the master Kerberos machine for each of the machines from the previous
step (the passwds must match, of course).
.Pp
Run
.Xr ext_srvtab 8
for each of the client machines (and the server) copy the
.Pa srvtab.new
files onto the appropriate machines.  Make sure the client
machines also have the correct
.Pa /etc/kerberosIV/krb.conf
files and have the correct services enabled in
.Pa /etc/inetd.conf .
.Pp
Users should be able to create principals for themselves using
.Xr register 1
on the machines that are set up to run it.
.Pp
The kerberized
Nm passwd
command will change the Kerberos password --
use the
.Fl l
flag to change the local password.
.Pp
The su command uses roots .klogin file for authentication uses the root
instance for the current user for the passwd -- the entries in root's
.klogin file should be of the form:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
user.root@realm
.Ed
(e.g., polk.root@BSDI.COM).  You can create root instances using
.Ql "kdb_edit -n" .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Pa /etc/kerberosIV/krb.conf
Kerberos configuration file, contains Kerberos domain and server information.
.It Pa /etc/kerberosIV/krb.realms
Host to Kerberos realm translation file
.It Pa /etc/kerberosIV/master_key
Saved master encryption key (used with commands that support -n).
.It Pa /etc/kerberosIV/principal.db
The Kerberos database.
.It Pa /etc/kerberosIV/register_keys/*
Encryption keys for
.Xr register 1 ,
one copy on the server in this directory, and another
on the machine itself in
.Pa /.update.keyXX.XX.XX.XX .
.It Pa /etc/kerberosIV/srvtabs/*
Output files from
.Xr ext_srvtab 8 .  These files contains all
the keys registered for Kerberos-mediated services on each host.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kdestroy 1 ,
.Xr kerberos 1 ,
.Xr kinit 1 ,
.Xr klist 1 ,
.Xr ksrvtgt 1 ,
.Xr register 1 ,
.Xr ext_srvtab 8 ,
.Xr kdb_destroy 8 ,
.Xr kdb_edit 8 ,
.Xr kdb_init 8 ,
.Xr kdb_util 8 ,
.Xr kpasswdd 8 ,
.Xr kstash 8 ,
.Xr make_keypair 8 ,
.Xr registerd 8 ,
.Xr krb.conf 5 ,
.Xr krb.realms 5
